

Vonnis
RECHTBANK ARNHEM


Sector civiel recht

zaaknummer / rolnummer: 213351 / KG ZA 11-133

Vonnis in kort geding van 13 mei 2011

in de zaak van


1.	de besloten vennootschap met beperkte aansprakelijkheid
ORBUS INTERNATIONAL B.V.
gevestigd te Hoevelaken
2.	de besloten vennootschap met beperkte aansprakelijkheid
ORBUSNEICH MEDICAL B.V.
gevestigd te Hoevelaken
3.	de vennootschap naar buitenlands recht
ORBUSNEICH MEDICAL INC
gevestigd te Fort Lauderdale Florida Verenigde Staten
eiseressen in conventie
verweersters in reconventie
advocaten mrs. L. Oosting en R.M. van der Velden te Amsterdam


tegen


[gedaagde sub 1 en 2]
3.	de vennootschap naar buitenlands recht
KRAJSKA ZDRAVOTNI A.S. - MASARYKOVA NEMOCNICE V USTI NAD LABEM O.Z. 
gevestigd te 401 13 Ústí nad Labem Tjechië
gedaagden in conventie
eisers in reconventie
advocaten mrs. M.H.L. Hemmer en P.W. de Best te Breda.


 

1.	De procedure
1.1.	Het verloop van de procedure blijkt uit:
-	de dagvaarding
-	de mondelinge behandeling
-	de pleitnota van Orbus c.s.
-	de pleitnota van Mudr. [gedaagde sub 1] c.s.
-	de eis in reconventie.


1.2.	Ten slotte is vonnis bepaald.


2.	De feiten
2.1.	Orbus c.s. behoren tot de OrbusNeich groep die medische hulpmiddelen ontwikkelt produceert en distribueert voor de behandeling van vasculaire aandoeningen. Tot die hulpmiddelen behoort de Genous stent ook wel EPC (capture) stent genoemd.      


2.2.	Orbus International B.V. is de verkooporganisatie die vanuit Nederland de internationale verkoop van de Genous stent verzorgt. OrbusNeich Medical B.V. assembleert de Genous stents die wereldwijd worden verkocht (met uitzondering van de Genous stents die in de Verenigde Staten worden verkocht). OrbusNeich Inc. is het moederbedrijf van de OrbusNeich groep.  

2.3.	Mudr. [ ] [gedaagde sub 1] (hierna: [gedaagde sub 1]) is cardioloog en hoofd van de Cardiologie afdeling van het ziekenhuis dat geëxploiteerd wordt door de vennootschap die als gedaagde sub 3 in conventie is gedagvaard (hierna: Masaryk ziekenhuis). Mudr. [ ] [gedaagde sub 2] (hierna: [gedaagde sub 2]) is eveneens cardioloog in het Masaryk ziekenhuis.  
 
2.4.	[gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] hebben in het Masaryk ziekenhuis onderzoek verricht naar de werking van de Genous stent ten opzichte van de ‘bare metal’ (chromium cobalt) stent bij zogenoemde ST-elevatie Myocard Infarct (STEMI) patiënten. Dat zijn patiënten die een (nagenoeg) complete vernauwing van de kranslager hebben. Het door [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] verrichte onderzoek wordt ook wel Genius Stemi trial genoemd of GENIUS STEMI studie.

2.5.	Op 28 maart 2009 heeft [gedaagde sub 1] tijdens het American College of Cardiology congres (ACC congres) in Orlando Florida Verenigde Staten een presentatie gehouden over de Genius Stemi trial. Op de presentatiesheets die [gedaagde sub 1] daarbij heeft gebruikt (abusievelijk gedateerd 28 maart 2008) staat onder meer:


‘Purpose
The objective of this trial was tot assess the feasibility and safety of the use of EPC capture stent for treatment of STEMI and comparison of 30-day and 6-month outcome with chromium-cobalt stents.
The use of EPC stent may result in more rapid healing process and improve clinical outcome.
Single center Prospective Randomized (envelope)
No sponsor
Medical ethics committee of our institution approved the study protocol
Method
Between August and December 2007 100 consecutive patients with STEMI were randomly assigned (sealed envelope) tot receive either EPC capture stent (N=50) (Genous stent) or chromium-cobalt stent (…) (N=50)
Dual antiplatelet treatment was administered for 30 days in both groups.
A 6-month clinical angiographic and IVUS follow-ups were assessed in both groups.
Endpoints
MACEs’ (CV death MI clinically driven TLR) at 6 month follow-up
(…)
Statistical analysis (NCSS&PASS)
(…)
A two tailed value of p<0.05 was considered to be statistically significant
(…)
Baseline demographic clinical and angiographic characteristics
			Genous		CR-Co		P value
(…)
Time
 - onsetto PCI (minutes)	230		203		NS
(…)
Conclusions:’    
The use of EPC capture stents in the setting of STEMI is feasible and save.



Caveats:
However the rate of MACE (Major Adverse Cardiac Events vzr) at 6-month FU was significantly higher in Genous group when compare tot CrCo (chromium-cobalt vzr) stents.
                    		No Core lab
Warrisome (worrisome vzr) is the rate of late stent thrombosis in EPCs capture stent group
Larger randomized trials are mandatory’.


2.6.	Over de Genius Stemi trial is ook bericht op internet. Op www.theheart.org (heartwire) staat onder de kop: ‘“Healing” stent suffers compared with bare-metal stent in tiny STEMI trail’ het bericht gedateerd 28 maart 2009:

‘Orlando FL – The innovative Genous stent (OrbusNeich) with its clever mechanism for promoting endothelial-cell growth on its blood-exposed surface which has demonstrated promise against stent thrombosis  (…) failed tot honor that promise in a small randomized feasibility study in patients with (…) (STEMI) (…)

In the 100-patient feasibility and safety study of the device patients who received the Genous stent turned in significantly higher rates of (…) (MACE) and target lesion revascularization (TLR) over six months compared with those getting chromium-cobalt stents and it was associated with the study’s only three instances of stent thrombosis.

The results of the Randomized Comparison of Genous Stent vs Chromium-Cobalt Stent for Treatment of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarctin (Genius-Stemi) trial were presented bij Dr [ ] [gedaagde sub 1] (…) here today (…) at the American College of Cardiology 2009 scientific Sessions.

[gedaagde sub 1] said the stent is “feasible and safe acutely and at 30 days” and called the stent-thrombosis issue “worrisome” but held that GENIUS-STEMI isn’t  the final word due to its small size especially given the stent’s earlier favourable performances (as reported by heartwire). He called for larger randomized studies of the device. Still he said “It’s fair to say that the chromium-cobalt stent did very well in this trial”.

The stainless-steel Genous is coated with “immobilized” murine monoclonal antibodies with affinity for surface antigens on native circulating endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) which are naturally attracted to sites of vascular injury. It’s designed so that the antibodies can “capture” EPCs from the circulation so they can blanket the stent’s blood-exposed surface. As confirmed in porcine histopathologic studies [gedaagde sub 1] told heartwire the EPCs indeed cover the stent struts and develop into endothelial cells.

Hopes have been that the Genous would overcome an important limitation of drug-eluting stents impairment of long-term endothelialisation and consequent need for prolonged dual antiplatelet therapy tot prevent late stent thrombosis. Importantly patients in both GENIUS-STEMI groups and in some earlier Genous studies were on dual antiplatelet therapy for only 30 days.


Assigned to formally comment on the study after [gedaagde sub 1]’s presentation Dr [ ] [betrokkene] (St Elizabeth Medical Center and Harvard Medical School Boston MA) observed that the study was small but strengthened by “meticulous attention to details standard clinical angiographic and [intravascular ultrasound] IVUS definitions and concordance of anatomic and clinical end points.”
So he said “the results are quite believable. And although the conclusion was that this study was just too small to demonstrate clinical benefit I think it’s too large tot dismiss the stent thrombosis that occurred following placement of the Genous stent.”


The 100 STEMI patients were evenly randomized to primary PCI with either the Genous or a cobalt-chromium bare-metal stent; glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor inhibitors and thrombus aspiration were included at the discretion of physicians. The groups had been clinically and angiographically similar at baseline.

Rates of MACE (conventionally defined as MI CV death or clinically driven TLR) and of cardiovascular events were few with no significant differences between the groups. At six months however rates for both MACE and TLR on its own were significantly higher among the Genous recipients.

Six-month clinical end point in GENIUS-STEMI

End point		Genous Stent n = 50 (%)	Chromium-cobalt stent n= 50 (%)	p


MACE				24		10			0.03
MI				6		2			NS
Cardiovascular death		4		4			NS
Target-lesion revascularization	14		4			0.04


No significant differences were seen in angiographic or IVUS measures of recurrence although there was a nonsignificant suggestion of an increase in neointimal hyperplasia volume by IVUS in the Genous group (49.7 mm³ vs 40.0 mm³).

All three cases of stent thrombosis among Genous recipients were classified as late-ocurring (31 to 360 days) definite thromboses according to the widely adopted Academic Research Consortium (ARC) criteria. None were fatal [gedaagde sub 1] said.


[betrokkene] seemed to feel that the Genous stent turned a decisive corner in the GENIUS-STEMI trial. “Maybe with this particular technology rather than [have] larger randomized controlled trials we should go back to some of the basics of proof of concept. First of all are endothelial progenitor cells truly captured using this design in patients undergoing PCI particular for STEMI and if they’re captured are they functional? To date with this design we have not seen any evidence that endothelial-cell capture reduces the degree of neointimal hyperplasia or lowers [the risk of] restenosis we just haven’t seen that with this technology.”
And het said “I think we have to show that these endothelial cells generated within the stent are truly functional in order tot suspect that there’s a link between better healing and lower stent-thrombosis rates. So I think it’s a very important trial but maybe as a result of it we should go back and look at some fundamental concepts with this important technology.”


[gedaagde sub 1] acknowledged to heartwire that with the Genous “there have been no histopathologic studies in humans. But we believe it works because we’ve seen it in porcine arteries.” He also acknowledged that the GENIUS-STEMI clinical results suggest otherwise. “But this was the only Genous study showing that result”.’
 
2.7.	Op www.ptca.org onder ‘Stent News’ staat onder de kop: ‘Small Trial for innovative ‘Healing’ Stent Contradicts Findings from Larger Studies’ het bericht:

‘March 29 2009 – Cardiologists anticipating positive results from small head-to-head study comparing the novel Genious “pro-healing” stent to a third generation bare metal chromium-cobalt stent were disappointed yesterday by less than favorable data from the 100-patient GENIUS-STEMI study. 

The presentation was made during the i2 Summit of the American College of Cardiology’s 58th annual scientific session by Dr. [ ] [gedaagde sub 1] head of Cardiology at Masaryk Hospital and University of J.E. [betrokkene] Usti nad Labem Czech Republic.

The study population was restricted tot heart attack patients presenting with ST-Elevated Myocardial infarction (STEMI) who were then randomized: 50 patients got a bare metal stent; 50 received the novel Genous endothelial progenitor cell (EPC) device. The results were not favorable for the Genous stent: the rate of Major Adverse Coronary Events (death heart attack revascularization) was 24% for the Genous vs. 10% for the bare metal stent. Target Lesion Revascularization (TLR) was 14% vs. 4%. Not only where these rates very high but they were far different from data that has been presented in the initial clinic trials for the Genous as well as a very large 5000-patient observational study called the e-Healing Registry.

Co-investigator of the e-Healing DR. Sigmund Silber MD FACC FESC chief of cardiology at Müller Hospital Munich in Munich previously had presented the one-year follow-up for the first 1640 patients at November’s American Heart Association Meeting. Although a registry differs from a randomized clinical trial it often more accurately mirrors the real-world us of a device. In fact outcomes from the e-Healing registry were better by factors of 3: MACE was 9.3% TLR was 5.4% and total stent thrombosis was only 1% giving credence to the chief characteristics of the Genous stent – safety and efficacy without the need for long-term dual antiplatelet therapy.

Angioplasty.Org asked Dr. Silber his reactions on the negative findings for GENIUS-STEMI and he commented:


“This was a small study underpowered for clinical events. This shows again that 
we need larger randomized trials before drawing any conclusions. A new device 
should be evaluated first in a small registry study (ca. 100 patients) then if it goes 
in the desired direction a large randomized trial with a primary clinical endpoint 
should follow preferably an all comers randomized trial. This stepwise procedure 
should be followed by the industry avoiding these discussions.”


Dr. Silber will be presenting additional data from the e-Healing registry at next month’s Annual Meeting of the German Society of Cardiology in Mannheim.


The Genous EPC stent is uniquely conceived. It is not a drug-eluting stent but rather is coated with an antibody that binds endothelial progenitor cells (EPC) circulating in the blood.
These cells then promote healing and cover the metal stent with endothelium. Drug-eluting stents work almost the exact opposite way by eluting a drug that suppresses cell growth to keep the stent from reblocking. However that same characteristics causes drug-eluting stents to delay healing and prolonging the period when platelets can aggregate around the stent struts causing blood clots or thrombosis often resulting in a heart attack.


Although late and very late stent thrombosis in drug-eluting stents is very small in percentage the results can be catastrophic. Moreover in order to prevent stent thrombosis patients must stay on aspirin and clopidogrel (Plavix) for 6-12 months or longer which can result in bleeding complications and which complicates subsequent surgical procedures for the patient. With the Genous stent only 30 days of antiplatelet therapy is necessary – which is why the very low total stent thrombosis rate of 1% at 12 months is striking. Researchers believe that while the Genous stent may not suppress restenosis as forcefully as a drug-eluting stent the benefits are many especially in patients unable to comply with a strict antiplatelet regimen. 

Commenting officially on the GENIUS-STEMI report at the ACC dr. Jeffrey [betrokkene] of St. Elizabeth’s Medical Center in Boston was concerned over the safety issues and opined that researchers might need to go back to the drawing board. He stated:


“Maybe with this particular technology rather than larger randomized controlled 
trials we should go back to some of the basics of proof of concept… Are 
endothelial progenitor cells truly captured using this design in patients undergoing 
PCI particularly for STEMI and if they’re captured are they functional? To date 
with this design we have not seen any evidence that it reduces clotting or the 
renarrowing of arteries. Maybe we should go back and look at some of the 
fundamental concepts of this technology.”


It maybe that in the setting of STEMI the endothelial progenitor cells work differently – perhaps due to the more thrombogenic environment. However Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] cautioned over-interpreting the results from this small single-center study. Only 50 patients received a Genous stent so the outcomes from a single patient could change the total results by two percentage points.’

2.8.	Op www.cardiovasularbusiness.com is vermeld onder de kop ‘Bioengineered stent comes up short in STEMI patients more data needed’ het bericht van 31 maart 2009:


‘Orlando Fla. – The Genous stent’s novel coating is designed to reduce both restenosis and stent thrombosis. In a small trial however it demonstrated increased rates of both when compared with a third-generation bare-metal stent according to research presented during the i2 Summit at the American College of Cardiology (ACC) 58th annual scientific sessions.
“The results have to be interpreted cautiously because this is a small single-center study” said lead investigator [ ] [gedaagde sub 1] an associate professor and head of cardiology at Masaryk Hospital and Universtity of J.E. [betrokkene] Usti nad Labem Czech Republic. “However in a head-to-head comparison the chromium-cobalt stents were doing better than the Genous stent at six month follow-up.”


In the Randomized Comparison of Genous Stent Versus Chromium-Cobalt Stent for Treatment of ST-Elevation Myocardial Interfarction (GENIUS-STEMI) trial researchers studied 100 consecutive STEMI patients. They randomized equal numbers of patients to the Genous Stent (OrbusNeich) and a cobalt-chromium bare-metal stent (BMS).

The Genous stent is designed to reduce the risk of restenosis while overcoming the tendency toward late stent thrombosis that has shadowed drug-eluting stents (DES) [gedaagde sub 1] said. The endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) attached to the stent are naturally elevated in response to arterial injury and have the capacity to differentiate into mature endothelial cells. The hypothesis is that the EPC coating will accelerate the healing process protect against stent thrombosis and minimize restenosis. Previous data from non-randomized studies and clinical registries have been promising [gedaagde sub 1] said.

Researchers followed-up patients with angiography and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS). Both groups received dual-antiplatelet therapy for 30 days.

[gedaagde sub 1] and colleagues found that at 30 days the combined rate of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) — defined as MI cardiovascular death and target lesion revascularization (TLR) – was comparable in the two groups. At six months however there was a significantly higher MACE-rate among patients treated with the Genous stent when compared with those treated with the BMS (24 vs 10 percent) mainly due to higher TLR which was statistically higher in the Genous arm (14 vs 4 percent).

IVUS showed larger amounts of tissue overgrowth inside the Genous stent although the difference was not statistically significant [gedaagde sub 1] said. In addition there were three cases of late stent thrombosis in patients treated with the Genous stent (6 percent) but none in patients treated with the BMS.

The researchers concluded that use of the Genous EPC capture stent in patients suffering from an acute MI is feasible and safe while expressing caution over the unfavorable results compared to the BMS.

“The rate of late stent Thrombosis in the Genous group is worrisome” [gedaagde sub 1] concluded. “Before generalizing these results a large randomized trial is needed to finally address this issue. Until then the EPC stents should be avoided in patients with STEMI.”’ 

2.9.	Op 9 april 2009 staat onder de kop ‘Novel Stent Designed to Aid Heart Attack Patients Needs further Study’ op www.dicardiology.net:

‘Researchers say a larger trial is needed to effectively test a novel stent designed to speed arterial healing in heart attack patients by attracting the body’s own circulation stem cells to create a protective layer over the implanted device.

Research from the Randomized Comparison of Genous Stent Versus Chromium-Cobalt Stent for Treatment of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (GENIUS-STEMI) trial was presented during the i2 Summit the ACC’s 58th annual scientific session last week in Orlando FL.

In the trial researchers evaluated the investigational stent’s ability to reduce both restenosis of the treated artery and blood clot formation on the stent (stent thrombosis). Instead the study demonstrated increased rates of both when compared to a third-generation bare-metal stent.

“The results have to be interpreted cautiously because this is a small single-center study” said [ ] [gedaagde sub 1] M.D. PhD an associate professor and head of Cardiology at Masaryk Hospital and University of J.E. [betrokkene] Usti nad Labem Czech Republic. “However in a head-to-head comparison the chromium-cobalt stents were doing better than the Genous stent at six month follow-up.”

For the GENIUS-STEMI study 100 consecutive patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) were studied. Equal numbers of patients were randomly assigned to undergo stenting with the Genous EPC (endothelial progenitor cells) capture stent or a chromium-cobalt stent.

The Genous stent is designed to reduce the risk of restenosis while overcoming the tendency toward late stent thrombosis that has shadowed drug-eluting stents. Coated with an antibody the Genous stent attracts circulating EPCs. These EPCs are naturally elevated in response to arterial injury and have the capacity to differentiate into mature endothelial cells like those lining the inner surface of arteries. It is hoped that this unique characteristic will accelerate the healing process protect against blood clot formation and minimize restenosis in stented arteries. Previous data from non-randomized studies and clinical registries have been promising.


During follow-up researchers evaluated the patients clinically as well as with angiographic imaging and intravascular ultrasound. They found that at 30 days the combined rate of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) – defined as heart attack cardiovascular death and repeat treatment of the target lesion – was comparable in the two groups. At six months however there was a significantly higher MACE rate among patients treated with the Genous stent when compared with those treated with the chromium-cobalt stent (24 percent vs. 10 percent; p=0.03). Patients treated with the Genous stent also had a statistically higher rate of repeat procedures in the originally targeted lesion (14 percent vs. 4 percent; p=0.04).
Intravascular ultrasound showed larger amounts of tissue overgrowth the most common cause of restenosis inside the Genous stent although the difference was not statistically significant. In addition there were three cases of late stent thrombosis in patients treated with the Genous stent (6 percent) but non in the patients treated with the chromium-cobalt stent.


The researchers concluded that the use of the Genous EPC capture stent in patients suffering from an acute heart attack is feasible and safe while expressing caution over the unfavorable results compared to the chromium-cobalt stent.

“The rate of late stent thrombosis in the Genous group is worrisome” Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] said. “Before generalizing these results a large randomized trial is needed to finally address this issue.”’ 

2.10.	Gedateerd 31 maart 2009 staat op www.pslgroup.com onder de kop ‘Early Results With Novel Stent Not Confirmed Over Time: Presented at ACC’:

‘Researchers report that a novel stent that showed promise early on in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) has shown a “worrisome” rate of in-stent thrombosis in a 6-month evaluation researchers reported her at the American College of Cardiology (ACC) 58th Annual Scientific Session.

The 6-month results of the Randomized Comparison of Genous Stent Versus Chromium-Cobalt Stent for Treatment of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (GENIUS-STEMI) were presented in a late-breaking session March 30.

Lead investigator [ ] [gedaagde sub 1] MD PhD Masaryk Hospital and University of J.E. [betrokkene] Usti nad Labem Czech Republic and colleagues designed the GENIUS-STEMI to compare the efficacy of the Genous stent with a chromium-cobalt bare-metal stent (BMS) in reducing restenosis and late in-stent thrombosis.

The study comprised 100 patients with STEMI who were scheduled for percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) with stent placement.

The Genous stent is coated with monoclonal CD34 antibodies that capture circulating endothelial progenitor cells which then differentiate into mature endothelial cells and replace areas of vascular injury and endothelial disruption with normal endothelial cells.

Unlike the promising preliminary results reported last fall Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] said that the 6-month findings show higher rates of both restenosis and late in-stent stenosis with the Genous stent compared with the BMS.

At 30 days the 2 treatment groups had comparable rates of major adverse cardiac events (MACE) – defined as heart attack cardiovascular death and revascularisation of the target lesion.

At 6 months however there was a significantly higher MACE rate among patients treated with the Genous stent compared with those treated with the chromium-cobalt stent (24% vs 10%; P=.03).

Patients treated with the Genous stent also had a statistically higher rate of target lesion revasularisation (14% vs 4%; P=.04).

Intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) showed larger amounts of tissue overgrowth the most common cause of restenosis inside the Genous stent compared with the BMS although the difference was not statistically significant.


There were 3 cases of late stent thrombosis in patients treated with the Genous stent (6%) but none in recipients of the BMS.
While the Genous stent is safe for patients with STEMI “the rate of late stent thrombosis in the Genous Group is worrisome” Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] said.


“Before generalizing these results a larger randomized trial is needed to finally address this issue.”

Funding for this study was provided by OrbusNeich.’


2.11.	Op www.cardiosource.com de website van het ACC wordt eveneens bericht over 
de op 28 maart 2009 door [gedaagde sub 1] gehouden presentatie:



‘GENIUS-STEMI
Trial design: Patients with STEMI were randomized to the endothelial progenitor cell capture stent
(n = 50) vs. a cobalt-chromium BMS (n = 50). Follow-up was 6 months.



Results
•	MACE: 24% with endothelial progenitor cell stent vs. 10% with bare-metal stent (p = 0.03)
•	TLR: 14% vs. 4% (p = 0.04) respectively
•	Stent thrombosis: 6% vs. 0% (P = NS) respectively



Conclusions
•	Among patients with STEMI the endothelial progenitor cell capture stent was inferior to a cobalt-chromium bare-metal stent
•	This experimental stent resulted in increased MACE TLR and stent thrombosis’ 


2.12.	Op 21 mei 2009 heeft [gedaagde sub 1] (met [gedaagde sub 2]) tijdens het zogenoemde EuroPCR congres in Barcelona (Spanje) een congres waar cardiologen elkaar treffen zoals ook op het genoemde ACC congres een presentatie gehouden over de Genius Stemi trial. Op de presentatiesheets die [gedaagde sub 1] daarbij heeft gebruikt staat onder meer:


‘Purpose
The objective of this trial was tot assess the feasibility and safety of the use of EPC capture stent for treatment of STEMI and comparison of 30-day and 6-month outcome with chromium-cobalt stents.
The use of EPC stent may result in more rapid healing process and improve clinical outcome.
Single center Prospective Randomized (envelope)
No sponsor
Medical ethics committee of our institution approved the study protocol
Method
Between August and December 2007 100 consecutive patients with STEMI were randomly assigned (sealed envelope) tot receive either EPC capture stent (N=50) (Genous stent) or chromium-cobalt stent (…) (N=50)
Dual antiplatelet treatment was administered for 30 days in both groups.
A 6-month clinical angiographic and IVUS follow-ups were assessed in both groups.
Endpoints
MACEs’ (CV death MI clinically driven TLR) at 6 month follow-up
(…)
Statiscal analysis (NCSS&PASS)
(…)
A two tailed value of p<0.05 was considered to be statistically significant
(…)
Baseline demographic clinical and angiographic characteristics
			Genous		CR-Co		P value
(…)
Time
 - onsetto PCI (minutes)	230		203		NS
(…)
Conclusions:’    
The use of EPC capture stents in the setting of STEMI is feasible and save.
Caveats:
However the rate of MACE at 6-month FU was significantly higher in Genous group when compare tot CrCo stents.
                    		No Core lab
Warrisome (worrisome vzr) is the rate of late stent thrombosis in EPCs capture stent group
Larger randomized trials are mandatory’. 


2.13.	Tot de door [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. gepresenteerde uitkomsten van de Genius Stemi trial behoort dat in de Genous stent groep in de 6 maanden follow up 3 gevallen van trombose zijn geweest tegen 0 in de chromium cobalt groep. De drie gevallen van stent trombose in de Genius Stemi trial (‘3 cases of late stent thrombosis in patients treated with the Genous stent’) zijn in opdracht van Orbus c.s. onderzocht door dr. G.J. [betrokkene 3] MD. In zijn rapport van 7 juni 2009 schrijft dr. [betrokkene 3] onder meer ten aanzien van het eerste geval:

‘Stent thrombosis at 4 weeks following the index procedure in an unusual case of a 25yr-old with hyperlipoproteinemia (clinical circumstance leading to second procedure not provided). No unusual morphologic or procedural features to explain the complication.’

en ten aanzien van de tweede patiënt:

‘Stent thrombosis in the RCA at 51 days following the index procedure. Morphologically the lack of overlap and the stent-no-stent movement and resultant angulation of the RCA lumen at the junction point may have played a contributing role in this stent thrombosis. Angiographic result in RCA PDA PLA are excellent at the end of the second procedure which involved placement of a third stent at the junction of the first two. However there is a complete occlusion of the acute marginal artery and the inferior LV wall is markedly hypokinetic / akinetic at the end of the procedure.’

en over het derde geval:

‘Stent thrombosis in the RCA at 48 days following the index procedure. The untreated defect above the stented segment at the time of the index procedure likely contributed to the development of SAT.’

2.14.	Ook het Harrington-McLaughlin Heart & Vascular Institute van de Case Western Reserve University te Cleveland Ohio Verenigde Staten (Case Core Lab) heeft in opdracht van Orbus c.s. de drie stent trombose gevallen onderzocht. In het rapport van 17 juli 2009 van het Case Core Lab staat onder andere:


‘General comments (potential predictors of thrombosis)
(…)
•	Technique related:
partial jailing of the diagonal branch lead to malapossed struts in the proximal part 
of the stent.’


en ten aanzien van het tweede geval:


‘General comments (potential predictors of thrombosis)
(…)
•	Technique related:
 Stent underexpansion may have occurred since non-uniform stent expansion was 
		observed represented by a difference between the MLD (2.87mm) and Max. LD in 
		stented segment.’   


en met betrekking tot het derde geval:


‘General comments (potential predictors of thrombosis)
•	Longitudinal geographic miss was observed at index procedure with 45 % diameter stenosis at the proximal edge of the stent accompanied by localized dissection type A. The adverse thrombotic event apparently occurred at this location (2). 
•	Target lesion was severely calcified and QCA data suggested possible under-expansion of the stent.’


2.15.	Op de website van de European Society of Cardiology (ECS) is in juli 2009 een abstract (nr. 2924) van de Genius Stemi trial gepubliceerd zoals dat in augustus 2009 ook gepubliceerd is in het vakblad European Heart Journal. Daarin staat onder meer:


‘A randomized comparison of genous stent versus chromium-cobalt stent for treatment of ST-elevation myocardial infarction. A 6-month clinical angiographic and IVUS follow. GENIUS-STEMI trial
(…)
Purpose: The objective of this trial was to assess the feasibility and safety of the use of endothelial progenitor cells (EPC) capture stent for treatment of ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) and randomized comparison of 6-month clinical angiographic and IVUS outcome with chromium-cobalt stents (CrCo).
Methods: Between January and December 2007 100 consecutive patients with STEMI were randomly assigned to receive either EPC capture stent (N=50) (Genous stent) or CrCo stent (N=50). The stents were implanted at low pressure (<10 atmospheres) with high-pressure postdilitation with a short bigger balloon in both groups. Dual antiplatelet treatment was administered for 30 days in both groups. A 6-month clinical angiographic and IVUS follow-up was assessed in both groups.
Results: Baseline demographic angiographic and procedural characteristics were well balanced in both groups. All procedures have been performed without complication in both groups. The rate of MACEs at 30-day was comparable in both groups. However there was statistically significant higher rate of MACEs at 30-day was comparable in both groups. However there was statistically significant higher rate of MACEs in the EPC stent group when compared with CRCO stent (24% vs. 10%; p=0.03) at 6-moth follow-up. Furthermore there was statistically significant difference regarding target-lesion revascularization between both groups (14% vs. 4%; p= 0.04) Notwithstanding there were 3 cases (6%) of late stent thrombosis in the EPC stent group and none in the CrCo stent group.
Conclusions: The use of EPC capture stent in the setting of STEMI is feasible and safe. However the rate of 6-month MACEs was significantly higher when compared to CrCo stents (mainly due to higher TLR). Furthermore the finding of 6% of late stent thrombosis in the EPC stent group is worrisome. Large randomized trials are needed do definitely address this issue however until that the EPC stents should be avoided in patients with STEMI.’


2.16.	Orbus c.s. hebben bij e-mailbrief van 1 augustus 2009 aan [gedaagde sub 1] onder andere geschreven:

‘Thank you again for your hospitality upon my visit to your institution earlier this month.
 
At out meeting we discussed the discrepancies which had been discovered in the GENIUS-STEMI Trial (GENIUS) from the vantage of study protocol vs. actual inconsistencies statistical methods and clinical assessments of specific cases within the study. I supplied you with the independent written assessments of both an expert clinician and a premier statistician which both confirmed the outstanding discrepancies. We agreed to respectively review the discrepancies and follow up with each other to confirm. A second clinical assessment by in independent core lab (…) substantially agrees with those of the first assessment by Dr. Gary [betrokkene 3] both of which are attached.

More specifically the key issues of these independent assessments are:


1.	According to your records (cine angio CDs) all stent thrombosis cases fall outside the GENIUS study period and therefore can not be included in the GENIUS analysis. (this fact alone leads to a conclusion in complete contradiction of your GENIUS results.) In our view this is an indication that the study was not consecutively randomized as claimed.
2.	The statistical analysis undertaken to compare MACE in the two arms of the GENIUS study are erroneous and arrived at conclusions not supported by facts.


I emphasized during our meeting the worldwide sales of our GENOUS stent have been substantially affected since your initial presentation at the ACC in March. Then after we had provided you with certain corrections to your slides to at least make them mathematically correct you again used the same uncorrected ACC presentation at the PCR meeting in Barcelona in May. The damage to our business continues due to conclusions made public by you regarding our product which are false contrary to fact and without statistical validity. The sensational (but false) conclusions of your presentations have received wide coverage worldwide and even influenced panel members at your ACC and PCR presentations to indicate that ethical boards could be reticent to approve clinical trials involving use of the GENOUS stent. The acceptance of further abstracts for presentation and manuscripts for publication may well be affected as well.

If the findings of the independent adjudication are correct you must not continue to present data which has been found by independent adjudicated review to be misleading and both clinically scientifically incorrect. Any abstracts with false date should be withdrawn from consideration and not be presented. Any manuscripts including this false data must either be withdrawn or should never be submitted. And you must correct on all erroneous presentations made in the past. We require that you confirm in writing how you will address these issues and what steps you will take to avoid this in the future. As part of corporate responsibility that we both have as well as acting on behalf of our patients there is an obligation to notify your institution’s review board about this issue.

Certainly we are all interested in the science of this field and the means by which we may optimize patient outcome. This requires the utmost attention to detail and rigorous scrutiny of all date before presentation or publication.

We look forward to your prompt response documenting in detail the appropriate action that you will take. We do feel an ethical obligation to communicate these issues to educational and publication bodies which provide the podium and scientific credibility for presentations. Needless to say OrbusNeich will defend itself vigorously especially if it is being attacked maliciously with publicity contrary to the fact.

I have attached a short presentation to be used by our sales force in defense of GENOUS which I provide for you prior to release. We will obviously need to take further action directed at the scientific and clinical communities as well as your Dean but as we determine our ensuing steps we would first like to urgently understand your intentions.’


2.17.	Bij deze brief was een schriftelijke verklaring gevoegd van 2 juli 2009 van prof. dr. J.G.P. [betrokkene 4] die aan de hand van drie vragen van Orbus c.s. een beoordeling heeft gegeven van de presentaties van [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. met betrekking tot de Genius Stemi trial.
In de verklaring van prof. [betrokkene 4] staat onder meer:



‘Question 1
What representation of MACE is considered to be the most relevant and/ or defacto standard in the literature: Hierarchical or Non-Hierarchical MACE
What would be your recommendation as to what to report.



Answer to Question 1
There is only one way to analyze MACE rates in two groups of patients. The correct method is described below.


First calculate the number of patients that have experienced a MACE in the two groups

Second fill out the 2x2 table summarizing the number of patients that have experienced a MACE and the number of patients that have not experienced a MACE.

Apply the correct statistical test e.g. Fisher’s exact test or a Chi-square test.


In the correct analysis any patient that has experienced two or more MACE events is counted once. Any analysis of a 2x2 table with cells enumerating multiple MACEs per patient is statistically wrong!
The analysis as presented in the slide subsumes that 24 Genous patient have experienced a MACE. This is only correct if no patient has suffered more than one MACE event.


This assumption though is highly unlikely. In all likelihood some patients must have suffered multiple events. If that is the case the number of patients that have suffered a MACE is less that 24.


The slide does not present the overlapping events. Let’s assume that the following events did occur:
-	One patient died suddenly.
-	One patient had a fatal MI (chest pain and CK-rises) was conservatively treated and died 
	in cardiogenic shock after 4 days.
-	One patient underwent primary PCI (TLR) for a STEMI after 36 days.
-	One patient developed CK rises over 3 x ULN after elective TLR.
-	Five patients had an uncomplicated TLR.



If these would have been the MACES in the GENOUS group 9 patients would have suffered a MACE and the MACE rate would have been 9/50 (=18%). Any analysis in which one would count 12 MACES among 50 patients is statistically wrong!!!
The tabulation of the above events can be done in two ways: either hierarchical or non-hierarchical.



The non-hierarchical tabulation would be as follows:
(…)



The hierarchical table would count patients once in the most severe category. The hierarchical tabulation would be as follows:
(…)


Please note that the number of patients with any MACE is the same (9) in both tabulations.

In conclusion the quintessence of a correct statistical analysis is to count and analyze patients with a MACE and not the total number of MACEs among randomized patients. This principle is nicely illustrated in the LEADERS publication.


Question 2
The investigators indicate that they have used the Chi-square test to compare the (clinical) outcomes of the Genous cohort with the control group (CoCr). They also apply the Chi-square test to outcomes with an incidence of less than 5 events in one of the groups. Please advise whether the Chi-square test is the appropriate method for these comparisons and especially on the usage of this test in the case of a low incidence in one of the groups?



Answer to Question 2
The Fisher Exact probability test is the correct test; the chi-square is an approximation to the Fisher Exact probability test. In the old days when computing was time consuming the chi-square test was recommended when the expected values in all cells of the 2x2 table ere above 5. When this condition is not met one should use the Fisher Exact test.


A (main frame) computer from the seventies would need several hours to calculate a Fisher Exact p-value. Today a PC would calculate any Fisher p-value within a fraction of a second.

In spite of this development many statistical texbooks today recommended the old rule i.e. to preferably use the Chi-square test. The Fisher Exact test should be only used when the expected value of any of the four cells of the 2x2 tabel is below 5. personally I would always use the Fisher Exact test.


The table of the (hierarchical) MACE events is as follows:
(…)


The expected value of the cells in the left column is 8.5 and in the right column 42.5. So all expected values are above 5 and one could use a Chi-square test.


The table of the 6-month TLRs is as follows:
(…)


The expected value of the cells in the left column is 4.5 and in the right column 45.5. The expected values in the left column are below 5. Therefore one must use the Fisher Exact test for this analysis of the TLR rates.


Question 3
The investigators show p-values (Chi-square evaluation) for the following outcomes.
Could you evaluate the p-values for us (Chi-square) and any other method that you deem appropriate for the results below.



Answer to Question 3
There are two ways to calculate the Chi-square p-value one with Yates’ continuity correction and one without. Generally the Chi-square with Yates’ continuity correction is recommended because it is better approximation to the Fisher Exact p-value.


The calculations of p-value for the two tables are as follows:


Hierarchical MACEs
(…)



6-month TLR
(…)


Conclusion: There is little to choose between the (theoretically correct) Fisher Exact p-values and those obtained from the Chi-square test provided that one uses the recommended Yates’ continuity correction. In both cases none of the differences reaches statistically significance at the 5% level.  

2.18.	In reactie daarop heeft [gedaagde sub 1] bij brief per e-mail op 21 augustus 2009 door Orbus c.s. ontvangen onder meer geschreven:

‘I really appreciate your hard work you have done to discover discrepancies and incorrections in the GENIUS-STEMI Trial. Thank you very much for an independent and comprehensive statistical analysis of MACE and core lab analysis of thrombotic cases. I do believe that this was mainly driven by your effort to find out the issues which could lead to the stent thrombosis and perhaps avoided these catastrophic events in the future as the patient’s safety is our main goal. However I would appreciate If OrbusNiech offered this help in the iniciation of the trial. I hope you also appreciate our effort in finding possible causes of stent thrombosis by providing your company with CD’s for a core lab analysis as we weren’t compelled to do that because the GENIUS was an independent trial without your sponsorship. I think this clearly shows that we were open to discussion and did not hide anything.


I would like to inform you that we decided to incorporate your comments recommendation and statistical analysis in the presentation. 12-month results of GENIUS will be presented during ESC 2009 in Barcelona with all corrections (hierarchical MACE 18 vs. 8%; p=NS TLR 14 vs.
4%; p=NS). Furthermore all these changes will also be enrolled in an upcoming manuscript. Study will not be presented at TCT 2009.
Concerning to the key issues you mentioned in your e-mail:


1)	Enrolment: In this point I have made a terrible mistake. An enrolment period was much longer (from 7/2006 to 5/2008). I did not ask my colleague for correct data (Dr. [gedaagde sub 2]) before preparing a presentation for ACC. Patients were randomly assigned to each group consecutively if there where sufficient number of stents on the stock in our cath.lab. So the study was randomized and patients were consecutive.

2)	 Statistical analysis of MACE: We also asked independent statistician in The Czech Republic (former head of statistic department of Medical faculty Hradec Kralove Charles University in Prague) for analysis. He more or less confirmed conclusions of your independent statistician. We will incorporate the conclusions in the study. However he concluded that if our primary hypothesis was “real number” of MACE’s then non-hierarchical calculation is also possible. Of course the question is if primary hypothesis was wrong or not. You can question the methodology but you cannot say the analysis as “false data”. 


Furthermore prof. Huay Cheem Tan had also used non-hierarchical MACE in his 
presentation: “A comparison of the use EPC captures stent (…) and BMS in the 
setting of AMI”.



I would also like to point out that the study was underpowered for clinical 
endpoints and along with this MACE is not so important. The major issue are the 
three cases of stent thrombosis in the Genous group. Of course stent thrombosis is 
multifactorial and mechanical issues (stent underxpansion or geographical miss) 
may play a major role in the pathology. However all stents were post dilate with 
non-compiant balloon inflated at high pressure (>15 atms) and this is a standard 
clinical practise at our institution. Since the IVUS was not used during the index 
procedure the conclusion that the stent under expansion could explain thrombosis is 
only speculative. Hypothetically if we accept the possibility of mechanical issues it 
is unlikely that all implantations in the control group were without either under 
expansion or geographical miss and there was no case of stent thrombosis anyway.
Dear Mr. Rasmussen (‘Assistent to the Chairman’ van OrbusNeich groep vzr) while presenting a data of our trial we always asked for careful interpretation of results because of study limitations. Especially we pointed out that the trial was single center small no powered for clinical end points and without peer core lab analysis.


I would like to remind that we were not convincing clinicians to use or not to use your device. We have always underlined unusual three cases of stent thrombosis in the Genous arm. Furthermore prof Haude reported for cases of stent thrombosis among 200 patients. For me as a clinician the patient safety is priority and our trial have shown some possible safety concerns and I think this is the main message from our study. I really think OrbusNeich should conduct large randomized trial on STEMI patients and “head-to-head” compare Genous stent with BMS/CoCr and DES (and probably with OCT) because only such a trial can dismiss any doubts.’ 

2.19.	[gedaagde sub 2] heeft op 31 augustus 2009 tijdens het ESC congres een presentatie gehouden over de Genius Stemi trial. Op de sheets van die presentatie staat onder meer:


‘Purpose
The objective of this trial was tot assess the feasibility and safety of the use of EPC capture stent for treatment of STEMI and comparison of 30-day and 6-month outcome with chromium-cobalt stents.
The use of EPC stent may result in more rapid healing process and improve clinical outcome.
Design:
Single center Prospective Randomized (envelope)
(…)
Single centre
Randomized
No sponsor
No core lab
Medical ethics committee of our institution approved the study protocol
All patients signed informed consent
Method
Between July 2006 and May 2008
100 consecutive patients with STEMI and single vessel disease were randomly assigned (sealed envelope) tot receive either EPC capture stent (N=50)/Genous/ or cobalt-chromium (CrCo) stent (…) (N=50)
(…)
Dual antiplatelet treatment was administered for 30 days in both groups.
A 6-month clinical angiographic and IVUS follow-ups were assessed in both groups.
Endpoints:
MACEs’ (CV death MI clinically driven TLR) at 6 month FU
(…)
Stent Thrombosis in EPC capture group:
3 stents thrombosis in EPC capture group (day 28 48 50)
According tot ARC:	3x definite
			1x early 2x late
Independent angiographic assessment was provided by OrbusNeich – stent thrombosis MAY BE associated with geographic miss and possible stent underexpansion
BUT
No Thrombosis in CO-Cr group with same technique
(…)
6-month clinical outcome – Non Hierarchical
(…)
                                             Analysis kindly provided by OrbusNeich
(…)
Limitations:
Small single centre trial
Underpowered for MACE
No Core Lab
Conclusions:    
The use of EPC capture stents in the setting of STEMI is feasible and save.
At 6-month we observed a trend to higher incidence of MACE and TLR in EPC capture group in comparison  with Cobalt-Chromium group but it did not reach statistical significance.
Warrisome (worrisome vzr) is the rate of late stent thrombosis in EPC capture group
Larger randomized trials for STEMI patients are mandatory.’ 

 
2.20.	Bij brief van 17 september 2009 heeft [gedaagde sub 1] aan ACC en ESC bericht:


‘As a principal investigator of GENIUS STEMI trial and also on behalf of the other investigators
I have duty to inform you about some inconsistencies in this trial regarding an enrolment period and statistical analysis. Unfortunately these discrepancies occurred by mistake. However we strongly believe that these inaccuracies did not influence our conclusions.


Genious STEMI study was presented at the EuroPCR 2009 in Barcelona. Trial was comparing EPC and cobalt-chromium stents in STEMI patients. It was shown in the presentation that an enrolment period was from “January to December 2007” however it was much longer. The correct enrolment period was from July 2006 to May 2008. We were enrolling consecutively patients with STEMI and single vessel disease and according to the availability of the stents on stock. The second inaccuracy was statistical analysis. We reported difference in MACE (24% in EPC group versus 10% in CoCr group) and TLR (14% versus 4%) between both groups as statistically significant (p=0.03 and p=0.04 respectively using x²’test; non-hierarchical). However this calculation was performed employing a single tailed instead of two-tailed test. Using a two-tailed test there was no statistical significance but only trend (p=0.06 for MACE and p=0.08 for TLR respectively). I would like to point out that the study was underpowered for clinical endpoints and along with this the rate of MACE is not so important.

We think that the major issue of this study is the finding of three cases of stent thrombosis in the Genous group. Of course stent thrombosis is multifactorial and mechanical issues (stent underexpansion or geographical miss) may play a major role in the pathology of thrombotic events.

Dear Sir/Madam please find enclosed new version of GENIUS STEMI presentation with all corrected data and also new version of the abstract.’

2.21.	Het abstract dat bij de brief was gevoegd had de navolgende inhoud:


‘Purpose: The aim of this trial was to assess the feasibility and safety of the use of endothelial progenitor cells capture (EPC) stent for treatment of ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) and comparison of 6-month clinical angiographic and intravascular ultrasound (IVUS) outcome with cobalt-chromium stents (Co-Cr).
Methods: Between July 2006 and May 2008 100 patients with STEMI and single vessel disease were randomly assigned to receive either EPC stent (N=50) or CoCr stent (N=50). High pressure stent postdilitatation was carried out in both groups. Dual antiplatelet treatment was administered for 30 days in both groups. A 6-month clinical angiographic and IVUS follow-ups were assessed in both groups.
Results: Baseline demographic angiographic and procedural characteristics were well balanced in both groups. The rate of major adverse cardiovascular events (MACEs) at 30-day was comparable in both groups. At 6-month follow-up there was a trend to higher rate (non-hierarchically) of MACEs and TLR in the EPC stent group when compared with CoCr stent (24% vs. 10%; p= 0.06 and 14% vs. 4%; p= 0.08 respectively) Furthermore there where 3 cases (6%) of stent thrombosis (ST) in the EPC group versus none in the CoCr group.
Conclusions: The use of EPC capture stents in the setting of STEMI is feasible and save in terms of acute or 30-days outcome. At six month follow-up we found a trend to higher rate of ST in MACE and TLR in the EPC group compared to CoCr stents. Worrisome is the rate of ST in the EPC group. Larger randomized trials are mandatory to address this issue. Untill that the use of EPC stent in patients with STEMI is questionable.’

 

2.22.	In november 2010 is een artikel van [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] over de Genius Stemi trial verschenen in het vakblad “Catheterization and Cardiovascular Interventions”.
Daarin staat onder andere:



‘Methods
Patients and Treatment
This is a prospective academic randomized open single-centre trial. The study protocol was approved by the local ethics committee at the study hospital and all patients signed informed consent before primary PCI. Between July 2006 and May 2008 822 patients were treated by primary PCI for acute STEMI at our institution. Among these 100 patients with STEMI and single vessel disease were randomly assigned to receive either EPC capture stent (N = 50)(Genous® stent OrbusNeich Fort Lauderdale FL) or cobalt-chromium stent (N = 50) during primary PCI (…)



Study End Points
The primary endpoint of the study were the rate of MACE including cardio-vascular death MI clinically driven TLR. Secondary endpoints included late lumen loss (LLL) at 6 months and volume of in-stent NIH at 6 months.



Statistical Analysis
Discrete data are presented as frequencies and percentage whereas continuous variables are presented as means and SD’s. A two-tailed student’s t test was used to test differences among continuous variables. The Chi-square test and the Fisher exact test were used for comparison of categorical variables. A P value of < 0.05 was considered significant.



Results
Baseline demographic clinical and angiographic characteristics were well balanced in both groups (Table I). Also procedural characteristics were well matched in both groups (Table II.) The use of GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors was slightly higher in the Genous group (22% versus 32%; P = NS) on the other hand thromboaspiration was used more often in the CoCr group (18% versus 24%; P = NS). However both these differences were not statistically significant.
Thirty-day clinical follow-up and 6-month angiographic and IVUS follow-ups are presented in Table III. At 30 days there were no differences regarding MACE. We observed two cardiovascular deaths (one cardiogenic shock and one stroke) in the EPC group and one cardiovascular death (cardiogenic shock) in CO-Cr group (P = NS). At 6-month follow-up we found a trend toward higher rate of MACE in the EPC capture stent group when compared to CoCr group (24% versus 10%; P = 0.06) (Fig.1). One additional cardiovascular death (heart failure in patients in sepsis) occurred in CoCr group. Furthermore we also found a trend of higher TLR in the Genous group (14% versus 4%; P = 0.08). These differences were not statistically significant by Fisher exact test or when hierarchical MACE events were analyzed by Chi-square test. There were three cases of ST in the EPC capture stent group at 6-month follow-up. All three stent thrombosis were classified as definite (proved angiographicaly); one occurred early (28-days postprocedure) and two occurred late (at days 48 and 50 postprocedure) according tot the Academic Research Consortium criteria. The two cases of late ST occurred on aspirin therapy alone and one case of early ST developed while the patient was on dual antiplatelet treatment. There were not significant differences regarding either LLL or mean NIH between both groups (0.98 ± 0.70 mm versus 0.79 ± 0.47 mm ; P = NS and 61 ± 72 mm³ versus 40 ± 22mm³; P = NS respectively).
DISCUSSION
(…)
The three cases of ST (at 28th 48th and 50th day) in the EPC capture stent group raise safety concerns for these innovative stents. (…) Of course stent thrombosis is multifactorial and mechanical reasons may play  a major role in the pathology of these catastrophic events. Off-line angiographic core laboratory analysis (Case Western Reserve University Harrington-McLaughlin Heart&Vascular Institute Cleveland OH) of thrombotic cases in our study suggested that mechanical issues (stent under-expansion in one geographical miss in the second and possible malapposed struts in jailing diagonal branch in the third case) might be a cause of these events. However stent implantation was carried out according to the standard clinical practice (high pressure implantation) in both groups. Unfortunately since IVUS was not used during the index procedure or at the repeat primary PCI it was not possible to directly assess potential stent underexpansion. However it is unlikely that all implantations in the Co-Cr group which had no thrombosis were without either stent underexpansion or geographical miss. However the sample size is too small to detect and understand the mechanisms of such rare events. Another reason for ST is only speculative. It might be that the attraction of EPCs on the surface of the stent is influenced by thrombus or that the thrombus itself adversely affects the role of EPC as demonstrated in experimental models showing platelet induction of macrophage and foam cell differntation of EPCs (…) Furthermore inadequate pretreatment with statins may play a role in this cohort of patients.’  



LIMITATIONS
There are several limitations in the present study. This is a small single center trial without data adjudication by an independent core lab or a clinical event committee. However this is the first randomized trial comparing EPC capture stents with standard stents in patients with STEMI so far.



CONCLUSION
The use of EPC capture stents in the setting of STEMI is feasible and safe regarding 30-day outcome. However the trend to higher rate of MACE and TLR in the EPC capture stent group at 6 month follow-up warrants further evaluations.
A larger randomized trial with adequate statistical power is mandatory tot definitely address this issue. Untill then the use of EPC capture stents is questionable in patients with STEMI.’ 



2.23.	In verband met de geschillen tussen partijen hebben Orbus c.s. professor R.J. de Winter benaderd voor een oordeel over de Genius Stemi trial. In dat verband heeft prof.
[betrokkene 5] een schriftelijke verklaring afgegeven gedateerd 11 april 2011. Daarin staat onder andere:



‘II	De GENIUS-STEMI studie
6.    De volgende informatie terzake van de GENIUS-STEMI studie is aan mij verschaft:
•	Slides van de presentatie van Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] tijdens het ACC congres d.d. 28 maart 
2009;
•	Slides van de presentatie van Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] tijdens de EuroPCR d.d. 21 mei 2009;
•	De abstract voor de ESC presentatie zoals gepubliceerd in European Heart Journal 2009;
•	Slides van de presentatie van Dr. [gedaagde sub 2] tijdens het ESC congres d.d. 31 augustus 2009;
•	Het artikel “Randomized comparison of endothelial cells capture stent versus cobalt-chromium stent for treatment of ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Six- month clinical angiographic and IVUS follow-up” dat gepubliceerd is in de november 2010 uitgave van Catheterization and Cardiovascular Interventions (CCI).


7.	Uit deze  stukken kan worden afgeleid dat de GENIUS-STEMI studie een “Single Center” studie met 100 patiënten zou zijn waarbij bij 50 patiënten de Genous stent zou zijn geplaatst en bij 50 patiënten een conventionele (“bare metal”) chromium cobalts stent. Het betreft een onderzoek met STEMI patiënten. STEMI is de afkorting voor St-Elevatie Myocard Infarct. Dit is kort gezegd een hartinfarct veroorzaakt door een volledige afsluiting van een kransslagader. Dit betreft een zeer kritiek aandoening en STEMI patiënten dienen dan ook onmiddellijk behandeld te worden.

8.	Uit de presentaties en het artikel blijkt dat Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] en Dr. [gedaagde sub 2] vergaande conclusies trekken ten nadele van de Genous stent. Zo zou er sprake zijn van een significant aantal MACE (Major Adverse Cardiac Events) en TLR (Target lesion Revascularisation) in de genous groep (later een ‘trend’ genoemd) deze hoeveelheid MACE na 6 maanden zou het concept van het prohealing effect van de Genous stent in twijfel trekken er zouden drie gevallen van stent trombose zijn geweest in de Genous groep hetgeen “worrisome” zou zijn en reden zou zijn voor “safety concerns”. Als gevolg van een en ander zou de Genous stent niet gebruikt moeten worden bij STEMI patiënten.

III	Gebreken in de GENIUS-STEMI studie de presentatie en het artikel

9.	De GENIUS STEMI studie is een kleine studie en er zijn belangrijke discrepanties tussen de presentaties en de uiteindelijk in het wetenschappelijk artikel vermelde resultaten. Er zijn een groot aantal verschillen tussen de gegevens zoals vermeld in de tabellen getoond tijdens de presentaties en de tabellen in de uiteindelijke publicatie. Ik heb voor deze verschillen geen goede verklaring. Naar mijn mening worden de conclusies zoals door [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] tijdens de internationale congressen gepresenteerd niet door data ondersteund. De conclusies van [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] zoals vermeld in het wetenschappelijk artikel zijn naar mijn mening evenmin door de resultaten van de studie onderbouwd.

10.	Na het bestuderen van de gegevens blijft een aantal belangrijke vragen onbeantwoord. Het is van groot belang dat er openheid van zaken wordt gegeven door de onderzoekers en dat alle informatie zoals vergaard in de studie kan worden bestudeerd.

11.	Er zijn in de berichtgeving fouten gemaakt die naar ik heb begrepen later zijn toegegeven maar die nimmer zijn hersteld. De vragen die moeten worden beantwoord en de fouten die zijn gemaakt worden hieronder geschetst.

De recruteringsperiode van de GENIUS-STEMI studie

12.	Wat allereerst opvalt is dat er afwijkende periodes worden gerapporteerd voor de recruteringsperiode (“enrollment period”) van de studie. Zo noemen de eerste twee presentaties een periode van 5 maanden (augustus-december 2007) het ESC abstract een periode van 12 maanden (januari-december 2007) en de ESC presentatie en het artikel een periode van 23 maanden (juli 2006-mei 2008).

13.	Dit zijn op het eerste gezicht onverklaarbare vergissingen. De recruteringsperiode staat vermeld in het onderzoeksprotocol. Over de lengte van de periode kunnen normaal gesproken geen misverstanden bestaan. Bovendien is het naar mijn mening onvoorstelbaar dat een onderzoeker die 23 maanden (plus follow-up) bezig is geweest met een onderzoek tot tweemaal toe per abuis stelt dat de onderzoeksperiode maar 5 maanden zou zijn geweest.

14.	Deze omstandigheden roepen dan ook de vraag op welke recruteringsperiode in het onderzoeksprotocol is vermeld en of het onderzoeksprotocol is nageleefd.

De (opeenvolgende) randomisatie van de GENIUS-STEMI studie

15.	In het wetenschappelijk artikel wordt gesteld dat 822 STEMI patiënten behandeld zouden zijn tijdens een recruteringsperiode van juli 2006-mei 2008 (23 maanden) maar slechts 100 patiënten zijn uiteindelijk toegewezen aan de GENIUS-STEMI studie. Het enige uitsluitingscriterium zou de onbeschikbaarheid van de Genous stent zijn. Dit roept vragen op: uitsluitingscriteria zien normaalgesproken op bepaalde profielen van de patiënt niet op de beschikbaarheid van het product. Het is onduidelijk of dit uitsluitingscriterium in het protocol is opgenomen en het is onduidelijk waarom er geen beschikbaarheid van de studie stent was bij het merendeel van de patiënten tijdens de inclusie periode.

16.	Wat opvalt is dat er bijzonder veel patiënten uiteindelijk niet zijn opgenomen in de studie. Slechts 100 patiënten hebben deelgenomen aan de studie en klaarblijkelijk zijn er 722 uitgesloten. Dat hoeft op zich niet bezwaarlijk te zijn zo lang de onderzoekers maar voldaan hebben aan het protocol (en mits dat protocol zorgvuldig is opgesteld). Dat de onderzoeker op dit punt moet voldoen aan het protocol is van groot belang. Als de onderzoeker dat niet zou doen dan zou hij bij wijze van spreken van de 722 STEMI patiënten die geen Genous stent hebben ontvangen 50 patiënten met bepaalde gunstige of ongunstige resultaten in de studie kunnen opnemen en op die wijze de resultaten van de studie kunnen beïnvloeden. De onderliggende stukken van de studie zijn dan ook van groot belang.

17.	Het is eveneens van groot belang dat de artsen van het Masaryk ziekenhuis openheid van zaken geven hieromtrent door bijv. afschriften van het protocol en informatie met betrekking tot de patiënten te verschaffen.

De GENIUS-STEMI studie is te klein voor klinisch relevante conclusies

18.	Om waardevolle resultaten op te kunnen leveren voor de klinische praktijk dient een klinische studie voldoend omvang te hebben (de studie moet “sufficiently powered” zijn.) In een kleine studie kunnen de resultaten van één enkele patiënt immers een grote invloed hebben op het uiteindelijke resultaat hetgeen in de weg staat aan voldoende betrouwbaarheid van de studie en de studieresultaten.

19.	De GENIUS-STEMI studie is simpelweg te klein om daaruit conclusies te kunnen trekken met betrekking tot de presentaties van de Genous stent. Overigens wordt dit ook vermeld in het wetenschappelijk artikel in het ‘Discussion’ hoofdstuk (“The present trial was underowered for individual clinical end-points”). In het hoofdstuk “Limitations” wordt eveneens vermeld dat de studie “small” was naar het veel belangrijkere punt dat deze ook “underpowered” was is daar weggelaten.

20.	[gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] erkennen derhalve dat de GENIUS-STEMI studie te klein was om daar zorgvuldige conclusies uit te kunnen trekken. Het vervolgens toch trekken van (negatieve) conclusies op basis van deze “underpowered” studie is naar mijn mening onzorgvuldig.

De resultaten van de GENIUS-STEMI studie zijn niet statistisch significant 

21.	[gedaagde sub 1] heeft tijdens het ACC congres op 28 maart 2009 en de EuroPCR op 21 mei 2009 gesteld dat de resultaten van de GENIUS-STEMI studie statistisch significant zouden zijn. Ook in de in het European Heart Journal gepubliceerde abstract voor de ESC presentatie vermeldt dit. [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] hebben inmiddels erkend dat de resultaten niet statistisch significant zijn.

22.	Als de resultaten van een studie niet statistisch significant zijn dan betekent dat dat het verschil op toeval zou kunnen berusten. De foutieve vermelding dat sprake zou zijn van een statistisch significant verschil betreft een ernstige fout aangezien daarmee naar het publiek gesuggereerd is dat de resultaten niet op toeval zouden berusten. Het is onduidelijk hoe deze fout tot stand heeft kunnen komen.

23.	In het wetenschappelijk artikel wordt gesproken van een “trend to higher rate of MACE and TLR in the EPC capture stent Group at 6-month follow-up”. In de medisch wetenschappelijke literatuur worden verschillen met een (niet-significante) p-waarde tussen 006 en 010 soms als een “trend” betiteld. Dit is echter bij een zo kleine studie als de GENIUS-STEMI studie m.i. zeker onjuist. Dit te meer daar wanneer de gebruikelijke Fisher’ Exact test wordt gehanteerd dit p-waarden van meer dan 010 oplevert.

Procedurele complicaties kunnen de drie stent trombose gevallen zeer wel verklaren

24.	Ik heb de documentatie ontvangen waaruit blijkt dat de drie gevallen van late stent trombose in de Genous groep onafhankelijk zijn beoordeeld door Dr. [betrokkene 3] en het zogenoemde Case University Medical Center Core Lab. Deze onafhankelijke beoordelingen hebben bij alle drie gevallen procedurele complicaties aangetroffen: stent onder-expansie verkeerde plaatsing van de stent en verkeerd geplaatste stent struts.

25.	Ik heb de angiografische gegevens en documentatie zelf ook bestudeerd en heb de stent onder-expansie verkeerde plaatsing van de stent en verkeerd geplaatste stent struts zelf ook waargenomen.

26.	Stent onder-expansie verkeerde plaatsing van de stent en verkeerd geplaatste stent struts zijn bekende risicofactoren voor (late) stent trombose ongeacht wat voor stent wordt gebruikt. Deze procedurele technische complicaties kunnen hebben bijgedragen aan de drie late stent trombose gevallen in de Genous groep.

De procedurele en technische gegevens van de overige patiënten in de studie zijn niet beschikbaar en heb ik niet kunnen bestuderen. Voor de beoordeling van de waarde van de studie is dit wel noodzakelijk. Hoewel [gedaagde sub 2] en [gedaagde sub 1] in het wetenschappelijk artikel stellen dat er waarschijnlijk ook in de controle groep onder-expansie onjuiste stent plaatsing of onjuiste stent strut plaatsing zal hebben plaatsgevonden blijkt dit niet uit enige beschikbare gegevens. De stelling wekt bovendien bevreemding aangezien de cardioloog dergelijke complicaties altijd dient te voorkomen. Of dergelijke procedurele complicaties zich ook in de controle-groep hebben voorgedaan is onduidelijk maar ook irrelevant. Voor zover dergelijke complicaties zich voordoen kunnen deze complicaties en eventuele stent trombose gevallen niet aan het ontwerp van de stent worden toegerekend. Dit hebben [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] ten onrechte wel gedaan.’

2.24.	Op 21 maart 2011 hebben Orbus c.s. een persbericht doen uitgaan. Daarin staat onder meer:


‘OrbusNeich today announced that it has filed a lawsuit in the Netherlands against Dr. [ ] [gedaagde sub 1] and Masaryk Hospital in Usti nad Labem Czech republic where Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] is head of the hospital’s Cardiology Department. The suit relates to a clinical study conducted at the Masaryk Hospital in which Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] was principal Investigator which purported to randomly compare OrbusNeich’s Genous stent with a bare metal stent for treatment of a class of heart attack patients. The results of the study reported certain adverse events with the OrbusNeich stent. However upon a review of the study by OrbusNeich and independent evaluators it was revealed that there were many inaccuracies misrepresentations and inconsistencies in the study the study methods and the reporting of the study conclusion.
The lawsuit alleges that Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] and the Masaryk Hospital have committed unlawful acts and asks for an injunction against further presentations or publications of the study. Addionally OrbusNeich requests that the court’s decision be submitted for publication in the U.S. Journal in which the study was published by Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] in the Journal as well as other remedies.


After the first presentation of the study at the American College of Cardiology in March 2009 in accordance with the practice of proper corporate responsibility and a serious concern for patient welfare OrbusNeich personnel contacted Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] to discuss the study and investigate the circumstances surrounding the reported adverse events. In response Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] provided limited information on three patients who experienced a stent thrombosis (blood clot). An independent evaluation of the date relating to those patients revealed procedural complications for all three patients namely under-expansion geographic miss and malapposed struts in a jailed diagonal branch which are recognized risk factors for stent thrombosis. It also revealed discrepancies in the reported data and inconsistencies and misrepresentations in the study and the reporting of the study. Upon presentation of the findings of the independent evaluation Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] admitted that he had made mistakes; however changes which he made to subsequent presentations and the publication of the study in a medical Journal did not correct the reporting of the defects in the study nor admit nor publish the errors and invalidity of the study.

Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] presented the results and conclusions of the study a number of times after he and the Masaryk Hospital were made aware of the defects in the study and the study reporting. As a result of the wide dissemination of the study and its erroneous conclusions that were not supported by the date numerous clinicians stopped using the product and terminated clinical trials and OrbusNeich suffered reputational damage. Despite many requests by OrbusNeich neither Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] nor the Masaryk Hospital has made public disclosure of the defects or deficiencies in this invalid study.’ 


3.	Het geschil in conventie


3.1.	Orbus c.s. vorderen bij vonnis uitvoerbaar bij voorraad 
1.	[gedaagde sub 1] c.s. ieder afzonderlijk te bevelen met onmiddellijke ingang na betekening van dit vonnis iedere presentatie publicatie of andersoortige openbaarmaking omtrent the GENIUS studie wereldwijd althans in de Europese Unie althans in Nederland te staken en gestaakt te houden althans om [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. ieder afzonderlijk te bevelen om bij het presenteren publiceren of andersoortig openbaarmaken omtrent de GENIUS studie wereldwijd althans in de Europese Unie althans in Nederland te vermelden:
dat een onafhankelijke analyse van de studie gegevens heeft uitgewezen dat er procedurele complicaties (zoals onder-expansie onjuiste geografische plaatsing en “malappossed struts in a jailed diagonal branch”) hebben plaatsgevonden bij alle patiënten die stent trombose hebben ondervonden en dat deze stent trombose gevallen zeer wel verklaard kunnen worden door deze procedurele complicaties die erkende risicofactoren voor stent trombose zijn;
a)	dat de gerapporteerde verschillen in aantallen MACE en TLR niet statistisch significant zijn;
b)	dat de studie niet (opeenvolgend) gerandomiseerd is;
c)	dat de studie onvoldoende “powered” is en van een dusdanige opzet dat daaruit geen conclusies voor de klinische praktijk kunnen worden getrokken;
d)	dat de patiënten in de Genous group gemiddeld 27 minuten later zijn behandeld dan de patiënten in de CrCo groep en dat een dergelijk verlengd tijdsverloop een significante factor is voor de uitkomsten van een dergelijk onderzoek;
zonder een en ander op enige wijze te bagatelliseren alsmede gedaagden ieder afzonderlijk te verbieden op enige wijze te stellen en/of te suggereren:
e)	dat er een significant verschil of trend van hogere aantallen MACE en/of TLR in de Genous groep zou zijn;
f)	dat de gerapporteerde gevallen van stent trombose te wijten zouden zijn aan het concept en/of de kenmerken van de Genous stent;
g)	dat het gebruik van de Genous stent twijfelachtig zou zijn bij STEMI patiënten en/of dat de Genous stent bij STEMI patiënten niet zou moeten worden gebruikt;
zulks op straffe van verbeurte van een dwangsom van € 25.00000 voor iedere dag of gedeelte van een dag dat een gedaagde het bevel geheel of gedeeltelijk niet nakomt of – ter vrije keuze van Orbus c.s. – voor iedere keer dat een gedaagde het bevel geheel of gedeeltelijk niet nakomt;


2. 	[gedaagde sub 1] c.s. ieder afzonderlijk te bevelen binnen 30 dagen na betekening van dit vonnis te bewerkstelligen dat op kosten van [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. een gecertificeerde Engelse vertaling van het vonnis zal worden gepubliceerd in Catheterization and Cardiocascular Interventions en/of zal worden geplaatst op de website van gedaagde sub 3 gedurende ten minste 3 jaar en dat de volgende tekst zal worden geplaatst in Catheterization and Cardiovascular Interventions en op de website van gedaagde sub 3:

‘Dear reader


By decision of [date] the Provions Judge of the District Court of Arnhem ordered us to make the following statement:
In the period 2009-2010 we have made several presentations regarding the GENIUS-STEMI study that we have conducted with the Genous stent of OrbusNeich Medical Inc. In the November issue of Catheterization and Cardiovascular Interventions we publiced an article in relation to this study entitled “Randomized comparison of endothelial progenitor cells capture stent versus cobalt-chromium stent for treatment of ST-elevation myocardial infarction. Six-month clinical angiographic and IVUS follow-up.” In the presentations and the article we concluded that after 6 months the Genous stent of OrbusNeich Medical Inc. showed a trend of MACE and TLR compared to the CoCr stent. In the presentations we even stated that the differences in this respect were statistically significant.


OrbusNeich Medical Inc. has contacted us several times in relation to errors and deficiencies in relation to the GENIUS-STEMI study and our presentations and publications of this study. In particular OrbusNeich Medical Inc. had provided us with independent assessments showing that the Major Adverse Cardiac Events may very well be explained by procedural complications which occurred during our study (such as under-expansion geographic miss and malapposed struts in a jailed diagonal branch) that the occurrence of MACE was not significant and that our conclusions were not scientifically sound. We have however failed to take these errors and deficiencies into account in our presentations and publications in relation to the GENIUS-STEMI study and wrongly suggested that the occurrence of MACE is attributable to the concept and/or design of the GENOUS stent. Furthermore we acknowledge that the trial was not (consecutively) randomized although we have published it as such. There were many errors which led to conclusions which could not be supported by the data or statistical protocol. We failed to fully and properly inform the public of these errors.

OrbusNeich has operated in good faith to try to understand whether their Genous product was performing according to its specifications and took appropriate action in contacting us to try and understand the nature of the serious issues which we alleged in an effort to assure their  responsibility to hospitals physicians patients as well as regulatory authorities. We have however failed to properly inform the public of OrbusNeich’ findings and wrongly continued to publicize incorrect information regarding the GENIUS-STEMI study and the Genous stent.

The Provisions Judge has considered that the presentations were unlawful against OrbusNeich Medical Inc. and its subsidiaries and ordered us to cease and desist from conducting further presentations and publishing further articles in relation to this study without mentioning that the procedural complications may very well explain the occurrence of MACE and that the occurrence of MACE was not significant. The Provisions Judge has also ordered us to cease and desist from suggesting that there would be a trend of MACE and/or TLR in the Genous group and that the reported differences would be attributable to the design or concept of the Genous stent. The  Provisions Judge ordered us to rectify this by means of this message.

A certified English translation of the decision of the Provisions Judge can be found online at the following address: [address of certified translation decision].

Sincerely yours


MUDr. P. [gedaagde sub 1]
MUDr. M. [gedaagde sub 2]
Masaryk Hospital


dan wel een door de voorzieningenrechter te bepalen tekst zulks op straffe van verbeurte van een dwangsom van € 10.00000 voor iedere dag of gedeelte van een dag dat een gedaagde het bevel geheel of gedeeltelijk niet nakomt of – ter vrije keuze van Orbus c.s. – voor iedere keer dat een gedaagde het bevel geheel of gedeeltelijk niet nakomt;


3. 	[gedaagde sub 1] c.s. ieder afzonderlijk te bevelen binnen 7 dagen na betekening van dit vonnis aan de advocaat van Orbus c.s. afschriften te overhandigen van alle documenten met betrekking tot de GENIUS-STEMI studie althans in ieder geval  afschriften te overhandigen van:
a.	“the raw data study spreadsheet” van de GENIUS-STEMI studie;
b.	Het oorspronkelijke protocol van de GENIUS-STEMI studie;
c.	De “consent papers” van alle patiënten met betrekking tot de GENIUS-STEMI studie:
d.	De goedkeuringsdocumentatie van de ethische commissie (EK MN in Usti nad Labem) met betrekking tot de GENIUS-STEMI studie;
e.	Alle documentatie met betrekking tot de selectie en beweerdelijke opeenvolgende randomisatie van de patiënten voor de GENIUS studie;
f.	Alle patiëntgegevens geanonimiseerd in overeenstemming met privacyrecht en op een wijze die Orbus c.s. in staat stelt om de (geanonimiseerde) gegevens te beoordelen;
g.	Alle correspondentie met organisaties waar [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. of één of meer van hen de resultaten van de GENIUS-STEMI studie hebben gepresenteerd waaronder de beweerdelijk op 21 oktober 2009 verzonden correspondentie die de beweerdelijke correcties op de presentaties zou bevatten en alle correspondentie in antwoord daarop;
h.	Alle correspondentie met cardiologen deskundigen en bedrijven met betrekking tot de GENIUS-STEMI studie waaronder de documentatie die aan hen is gezonden iedere analyse die is uitgevoerd met betrekking tot de studie en alle antwoordcorrespondentie;
zulks op straffe van verbeurte van een dwangsom van € 10.00000 voor iedere dag of gedeelte van een dag dat een gedaagde het bevel geheel of gedeeltelijk niet nakomt of – ter vrije keuze van Orbus c.s. – voor iedere keer dat een gedaagde het bevel geheel of gedeeltelijk niet nakomt;



4. 	[gedaagde sub 1] c.s. ieder afzonderlijk te bevelen binnen 7 dagen na betekening van dit vonnis aan de advocaat van Orbus c.s. een correcte en verifieerbare lijst te verschaffen van:
a.	alle gevallen waar [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. of één of meer van hen artikelen abstracts of andere schriftelijke stukken hebben ingediend bij uitgevers of andere organisaties met betrekking tot de GENIUS-STEMI studie met het verzoek en/of de bedoeling om deze te laten publiceren;
b.	alle presentaties met betrekking tot de GENIUS-STEMI studie die gepland staan of die [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. of één of meer van hen van plan zijn om te gaan verrichten;
c.	de namen en adressen van alle bedrijven en/of personen waaronder artsen ziekenhuizen en producenten van medische hulpmiddelen of vertegenwoordigers daarvan met wie [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. of één of meer van hen schriftelijk en/of mondeling de inhoud van de presentaties en/of publicaties met betrekking tot de GENIUS-STEMI studie en/of concepten daarvan hebben besproken;
d.	de namen en adressen van alle bedrijven organisaties en/of personen waaronder artsen ziekenhuizen en producenten van medische hulpmiddelen of vertegenwoordigers daarvan aan wie [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. of één of meer van hen kopieën van de presentaties en/of publicaties met betrekking tot de GENIUS-STEMI studie en/of concepten daarvan hebben gezonden;
e.	de namen en adressen van alle bedrijven en/of personen waaronder artsen ziekenhuizen en producenten van medische hulpmiddelen of vertegenwoordigers daarvan die [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. of één of meer van hen hebben gefinancierd (in termen van geld of anderszins) met betrekking tot de GENIUS-STEMI studie en/of de presentaties en/of publicaties daarvan.
zulks op straffe van verbeurte van een dwangsom van € 10.00000 voor iedere dag of gedeelte van een dag dat een egdaagde het bevel geheel of gedeeltelijk niet nakomt of – ter vrije keuze van Orbus c.s. – voor iedere keer dat een gedaagde het bevel geheel of gedeeltelijk niet nakomt


5. 	[gedaagde sub 1] c.s. hoofdelijk te veroordelen in de kosten van deze procedure.

3.2.	[gedaagde sub 1] c.s. voeren verweer. Op de stellingen van partijen wordt hierna voor zover van belang nader ingegaan. 


4.	Het geschil in reconventie

4.1.	[gedaagde sub 1] c.s. vorderen voor het geval de voorzieningenrechter in conventie bevoegdheid aanneemt om kennis te nemen van de zaak:

1.	Orbus c.s. ieder afzonderlijk te verbieden met onmiddellijke ingang na betekening van dit vonnis in enige uiting te stellen of te suggereren dat [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. geweigerd hebben om de door hen erkende discrepanties in de presentaties van maart 2009 en mei 2009 te corrigeren in latere publicaties op straffe van een dwangsom van € 50.00000 per keer dat in strijd met dit verbod wordt gehandeld;

2.	Orbus c.s. ieder afzonderlijk te verbieden met onmiddellijke ingang na betekening van dit vonnis in enige uiting te stellen of te suggereren dat [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. hebben nagelaten om de (conclusies uit de) angiografische analyse die na de eerste publicatie heeft plaatsgevonden te vermelden in latere publicaties op straffe van een dwangsom van € 50.00000 per keer dat in strijd met dit verbod wordt gehandeld;

3.	Orbus c.s. te verplichten gezamenlijk een persbericht te doen uitgaan aan alle geadresseerden/ontvangers van het persbericht dat als productie 14 in conventie is overgelegd met de volgende tekst:

Dear reader

By decision of [date] the Provisions Judge of the District Court of Arnhem the Netherlands ordered us to correct our press release of 21 March 2011 by publishing this statement.


In the press release of 21 March 2011 OrbusNeich first of all incorrectly suggested that Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] and his team refused to correct discrepancies in the presentation at the ACC 2009 that were recognized by Dr. [gedaagde sub 1]. All discrepancies recognized by Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] were in fact corrected.
In the press release of 21 March 2011 OrbusNeich also suggested incorrectly and unlawfully that Dr. [gedaagde sub 1] and his team did not report relevant independent angiographic analysis which suggested procedural complications for three stent thrombosis patients in later publications. These analysis and the suggested procedural complications were in fact reported in later publications of Mr. [gedaagde sub 1] and his team.


OrbusNeich


althans een door de voorzieningenrechter te bepalen tekst zulks op straffe van een dwangsom van € 10.00000 per dag of gedeelte van een dag dat een gedaagde het bevel geheel of gedeeltelijk niet nakomt 
4. 	Orbus c.s. hoofdelijk te veroordelen in de kosten van deze procedure.


4.2.	Orbus c.s. voeren verweer. Op de stellingen van partijen wordt hierna voor zover van belang nader ingegaan. 



5.	De beoordeling in conventie
5.1.	Het spoedeisend belang vloeit in voldoende mate uit de stellingen van Orbus c.s. voort.


5.2.	Het gaat in deze zaak -kort samengevat- om het volgende. Orbus c.s. produceren en verhandelen een innovatieve stent de Genous stent. Een stent is een buisvormige metalen constructie die bij een dotterbehandeling waarbij een vernauwd bloedvat wordt geopend in het bloedvat wordt geplaatst om het open te houden. Na de plaatsing van de stent bestaat een risico voor trombose. Ten opzichte van bestaande ‘bare metal stents’ en ‘drug eluting stents (DES) is het bijzondere van de stent van Orbus c.s. dat die voorzien is van een antilichaam oppervlakte coating die in het bloed circulerende ‘Endothelial Progenitor Cells (EPC’s)’ aantrekt. Daardoor vindt een versnelde inkapseling plaats van de stent in een endotheellaag. Deze zogenoemde EPC-stent is bedoeld om zo het risico op trombose te verkleinen. [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] die beiden als cardioloog aan het Masaryk ziekenhuis zijn verbonden hebben in een periode tussen medio 2006 en medio 2008 een onderzoek uitgevoerd onder Stemi (St. Elevatie Myocard infarct)-patienten. Dat zijn patiënten met een hartinfarct veroorzaakt door een volledige afsluiting van de kransslagader. Dat onderzoek (Genius Stemi trial) heeft plaatsgevonden door enerzijds een groep van 50 Stemi-patienten te volgen bij wie de EPC-stent is geplaatst en anderzijds een groep van 50 Stemi-patiënten te volgen bij wie een ‘bare metal (chromium cobalt) stent’ is geplaatst. [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] hebben bij dit volgen van beide groepen patiënten in de EPC-stent groep 12 gevallen van Mace (Major Adverse Cardiac Events) gevonden tegen 5 in de Chromium Cobalt-stent groep waaronder 3 gevallen van trombose in de EPC-stent groep tegen 0 in de Chromium Cobalt-stent groep. Verder hebben zij 7 gevallen van TLR (Target lesion Revascularisation) in de EPC-stent groep gevonden tegen 2 in de Chromium Cobalt-stent groep en tenslotte 3 gevallen van Myocardial Infarction in de EPC-stent groep tegen 1 in de Chromium Cobalt groep. [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] hebben deze resultaten en daaruit door hen getrokken conclusies op diverse cardiologiecongressen gepresenteerd. Verslagen daarvan zijn op internet gepubliceerd. Voorts hebben zij de resultaten gepubliceerd in de vorm van een tijdschriftartikel in Catheterization and Cardiovascular Inventions (CCI) 2010. Een slotsom waartoe [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] zijn gekomen is dat een veel omvangrijker onderzoek naar de EPC-stent nodig is en dat het gebruik van de EPC-stent bij Stemi-patienten tot zolang te ontraden of op zijn minst twijfelachtig is. Orbus c.s. stellen dat zij tengevolge van de publicatie van dit onderzoek en de daaruit door [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] getrokken conclusies de verkopen van de Genous-stent hebben zien inzakken en daardoor schade alsmede reputatieschade lijden. Orbus c.s. stellen zich op het standpunt dat – kort gezegd – fouten bij het onderzoek zijn gemaakt en dat de conclusies die [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] daaruit hebben getrokken niet door (de resultaten van) het onderzoek kunnen worden gedragen. Zij menen dat [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] aldus in strijd handelen met hetgeen volgens ongeschreven recht jegens hen in het maatschappelijk verkeer betaamt. Orbus c.s. vorderen daarom – kort samengevat – een verbod op verdere publicatie althans zonder een heel aantal aanpassingen rectificatie en afgifte van alle onderliggende onderzoeksgegevens teneinde zelf te laten onderzoeken wat er van de deugdelijkheid van het onderzoek zij. [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] hebben zich ter afwering van de vordering onder andere beroepen op het recht op vrijheid van meningsuiting.


5.3.	Primair hebben [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. zich echter beroepen op het ontbreken van rechtsmacht van de Nederlandse rechter. Zij stellen zich op het standpunt dat zij op de voet van art. 2 lid 1 EEX-Vo opgeroepen hadden moeten worden voor het gerecht van hun woonplaats in Tjechië. Orbus c.s. beroepen zich echter op art. 5 lid 2 onder 3 EEX-Vo. Daaromtrent moet als volgt worden overwogen. Orbus c.s. hebben onweersproken ter zitting aangevoerd dat Orbus International BV gevestigd te Hoevelaken de verkooporganisatie is van waaruit de Genous-stent wereldwijd wordt verkocht en dat OrbusNeich Medical BV eveneens gevestigd in Hoevelaken het bedrijf is waar de assemblage plaatsvindt van de wereldwijd te distribueren Genous-Stents en dat daarom in Nederland omzet- en reputatieschade door Orbus wordt geleden. Aldus is aannemelijk dat voorzover Orbus c.s. schade lijden door onrechtmatige gedragingen van [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. die schade primair in Nederland door deze Nederlandse vennootschappen wordt geleden.
Orbus c.s. hebben verder onbetwist gesteld niet alleen dat (de resultaten van) het onderzoek via internet ook in Nederland worden verspreid maar ook doordat het CCI met het artikel van [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] in Nederland is verspreid en in het bijzonder in de Radbouduniversiteit voorhanden is. Aldus moet worden geoordeeld dat ook het schadebrengende feit de in de visie van Orbus c.s.: onrechtmatige publicatie mede in Nederland heeft plaatsgevonden. In zoverre moet worden geoordeeld dat de Nederlandse rechter rechtsmacht toekomt voorzover het gaat om voorzieningen ter redressering van in Nederland geleden of te duchten schade. Aangezien de beide Nederlandse Orbus vennootschappen in Hoevelaken zijn gevestigd is de voorzieningenrechter van de rechtbank Arnhem relatief bevoegd.



5.4.	Ten aanzien van het toepasselijke recht is van toepassing de Verordening 864/2007 (EG) betreffende het recht dat van toepassing is op niet contractuele verbintenissen
(Rome II) nu de [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. verweten onrechtmatige daad schuilt in publicatie van de resultaten van hun onderzoek en de eerste publicatie daarover na de inwerkingtreding van Rome II op 11 januari 2009 heeft plaatsgevonden. Volgens artikel 4 lid 1 is op vorderingen uit onrechtmatige daad van toepassing – kort gezegd – het recht van het land waar de schade zich voordoet ongeacht het feit waar de schadeveroorzakende gebeurtenis zich heeft voorgedaan (lex loci damni). Aangezien aannemelijk is dat de schade primair geleden wordt door de beide in Nederland gevestigde Orbus vennootschappen is het Nederlandse recht van toepassing. Dat zich hier een situatie voordoet die tot toepassing van een van de uitzonderingen daarop moet leiden is onvoldoende aannemelijk geworden.


5.5.	Tot uitgangspunt van de beoordeling dient dat ook wetenschappelijke publicaties als waarom het hier gaat onder omstandigheden onrechtmatig kunnen zijn jegens derden die daardoor schade dreigen te zullen lijden. Wetenschappelijke publicaties vallen echter onder het door art. 10 lid 1 EVRM beschermde recht op vrijheid van meningsuiting (terwijl wetenschappelijke vrijheid als zodanig ook wordt gegarandeerd in art. 13 Handvest van de grondrechten van de Europese Unie van 7 december 2000 PbEG C 364 gewijzigd 12 december 2007 PbEU C303). De vraag onder welke omstandigheden een wetenschappelijke publicatie onrechtmatig jegens een derde kan zijn kan daarom slechts worden beantwoord in het kader van deze aldus beschermde rechten en binnen de grenzen van de inbreuken daarop die volgens art. 10 lid 2 EVRM toelaatbaar zijn. Dat kunnen slechts zijn ‘beperkingen of sancties die bij de wet zijn voorzien en in een democratische samenleving noodzakelijk zijn in het belang van de nationale veiligheid territoriale integriteit of openbare veiligheid het voorkomen van wanordelijkheden en strafbare feiten de bescherming van de gezondheid of de goede zeden de bescherming van de goede naam of de rechten van anderen om verspreiding van vertrouwelijke mededelingen te voorkomen of om het gezag en de onpartijdigheid van de rechterlijke macht te waarborgen’. Ook beperkingen op grond van art. 6:162 BW wegens handelingen die in strijd zijn met hetgeen volgens ongeschreven recht in het maatschappelijk verkeer betaamt hebben te gelden als beperkingen die bij de wet zijn voorzien (HR 2 mei 2003 NJ 200480).

5.6.	Om aan te kunnen nemen dat een beperking in een democratische samenleving noodzakelijk is (ter bescherming van rechten van anderen zoals hier Obus c.s.) zal moeten blijken van een ‘pressing social need’ een dringende maatschappelijke behoefte daaraan. Voorts zal de beperking ‘proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued’ moeten zijn dat wil zeggen een gerechtvaardigd doel moeten dienen. Met inachtneming van dit een en ander zal een belangenafweging plaats moeten vinden rekening houdend met alle concrete omstandigheden van het geval. Afgewogen zullen dus moeten worden de door Orbus c.s. voor toewijzing van hun vorderingen ingeroepen belangen waarin zij stellen onrechtmatig te worden geschaad en de belangen die ermee gemoeid zijn dat [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] de resultaten van hun onderzoek en de daaruit door hen getrokken conclusies (ongecensureerd) openbaar kunnen maken.

5.7.	Bij de beoordeling moet worden vooropgesteld dat “freedom of expression constitutes one of the essential foundations of a democratic society and one of the basic conditions for its progress and for each individuals’s self-fulfilment. Subject to paragraph 2 of Article 10 it is applicable not only to ‘information’ or ‘ideas’ that are favourably received or regarded as inoffensive or as a matter of indifference but also to those that offend shock or disturb. Such are the demands of pluralism tolerance and broadmindedness without there is no ‘’democratic society’. As set forth in Article 10 this freedom is subject to exceptions which (….) must however be construed strictly and the need for any restrictions must be established convincingly” (EHRM 25 augustus 1998 NJ 1999712 (Hertel/Zwitserland). Zoals de voorzieningenrechter eerder heeft overwogen (Vzg. Rechtbank Arnhem 18 juli 2008 NJ 2008544) spreekt voor zich dat wat hiervoor is geciteerd in het bijzonder ook geldt voor publicatie van resultaten van wetenschappelijk onderzoek. De mogelijkheid van ongecontroleerde publicatie van wetenschappelijk onderzoek is evenzeer ‘one of the basic conditions for (..) progress of a democratic society’. Aan die mogelijkheid komt daarom reeds in abstracto groot gewicht toe. In de hiervoor genoemde zaak (NJ 2008544) ging het om publicatie van onderzoek waarvan de juistheid niet ter discussie stond. In die zaak werd een verbod op publicatie juist gevraagd omdat wat het onderzoek aan het licht had gebracht juist was maar de bekendmaking daarvan veiligheidsrisico’s op zou leveren. In dit geval berusten de vorderingen van Orbus c.s. echter daarop dat het onderzoek onjuistheden bevat. Bij de beantwoording van de vraag in hoeverre onjuistheden in wetenschappelijk onderzoek en de daaruit getrokken conclusies tot beperkingen in de vrijheid van publicatie kunnen leiden dient het volgende in overweging genomen te worden. Een belangrijke voorwaarde voor de ontwikkeling van wetenschap als op onderzoek gebaseerde gesystematiseerde kennisvergaring is dat de een kan voortbouwen op het werk van de ander. Daartoe behoort ook dat onvolkomenheden en fouten in onderzoek van de een door anderen blootgelegd worden. Ook daaruit wordt inzicht verkregen. Wetenschap berust mede op voortschrijdend inzicht. Het blootleggen van onvolkomenheden en fouten zal daarom voor een belangrijk deel binnen het wetenschappelijk discours moeten plaatsvinden. Het is mede met het oog op een goede werking van dat discours dat groot belang gehecht moet worden aan de mogelijkheid van ongecontroleerde publicatie van onderzoeksresultaten. Behalve deze algemeen maatschappelijke belangen zijn er de individuele belangen van [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] van hun persoonlijke ‘self-fulfilment’ gemoeid met onbeperkte publicatie van (de resultaten van) hun onderzoek.

5.8.	Aan de zijde van Orbus c.s. gaat het in de eerste plaats om hun commerciële belang. Zij beroepen er zich op dat sinds de publicatie van het onderzoek van [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. hun verkopen van de Genous-stent zijn gedaald. Naar voor de hand ligt hebben Orbus c.s. (mogelijk zeer aanzienlijke) kosten gemaakt voor de ontwikkeling van de innovatieve Genous-stent die niet alleen terugverdiend moeten worden maar ook rendement in de vorm van winstgevendheid op moeten leveren. Zij hebben er belang bij dat de veiligheid en de betrouwbaarheid van de Genous-stent niet (op ondeugdelijke gronden) ter discussie wordt gesteld. Meer in het algemeen is er het meer algemene maatschappelijk belang dat het risico op afbreuk van een innovatief product door onvoldoende gefundeerde wetenschappelijke onderzoeken de bereidheid van producenten tot het maken van hoge ontwikkelingskosten kan doen afnemen waarmee innovatie onder druk kan komen te staan.

5.9.	Tegen de achtergrond van dit een en ander moet omtrent de door Orbus c.s. gestelde onjuistheden in het onderzoek als volgt worden overwogen. Dat bij het onderzoek in beide groepen van patiënten met resp. EPC-stent en Chromium Cobalt- stent aantallen gevallen van Mace TLR trombose en Myocardial Infarction zoals hiervoor onder 5.2 vermeld zijn aangetroffen staat op zichzelf niet ter discussie. Namens Orbus c.s. is nog wel gesteld dat ten onrechte door [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] is aangenomen dat er in de Genous-stent groep 12 gevallen van MACE zijn gevonden terwijl dat er maar 9 waren. Anders dan Orbus c.s. stellen lijkt het daarbij niet om een verschil te gaan in hetgeen feitelijk is gevonden maar om verschil van inzicht in de statistische behandeling van de gegevens. Daarop duidt de beantwoording van vragen van prof. [betrokkene 4] d.d. 2 juli 2009 (prod. 24 Orbus c.s.) terwijl namens [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. ter zitting onweersproken is gesteld dat het geschil over 12 of 9 gevallen van MACE ziet op een ‘hierarchical’ of ‘non-hierarchical’ statistische benadering maar niets afdoet aan het feitelijke gegeven dat er 12 gevallen van MACE zijn waargenomen in de Genous-stent groep. Dat standpunt was door [gedaagde sub 1] reeds ingenomen in zijn brief die op 21 augustus 2009 is ontvangen door Orbus c.s. (prod. 11 van Orbus c.s. geciteerd onder 2.18). Voor het overige is niet gesteld of gebleken dat deze feitelijke waarnemingen onjuist zijn.

5.10.	Een belangrijk punt van kritiek van Orbus c.s. is dat [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] de gevonden aantallen MACE en TLR in de Genous-stent groep ten opzichte van de Chromium Cobalt-stent groep significant hoger hebben genoemd. Orbus c.s. hebben na de eerste presentaties van de Genius-Stemi studie op het ACC congres van 28 maart 2009 en het EuroPCR congres van 21 mei 2009 onderbouwd met het bericht van prof. [betrokkene 4] bij [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] aan de orde gesteld dat dit statistisch onjuist is. [gedaagde sub 1] heeft dat in zijn brief die op 21 augustus 2009 door Orbus c.s. is ontvangen (prod 11) erkend en toegezegd dat in de Genius-Stemi studie te zullen verwerken. In de latere presentaties (ESC) en de uiteindelijke publicatie in CCI hebben zij de gevonden aantallen niet langer significant genoemd. Geconstateerd moet dan ook worden dat [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] deze statistische onjuistheid hebben gecorrigeerd. [gedaagde sub 2] heeft in zijn ESC presentatie van augustus/september 2009 als conclusie vermeld dat in de 6 maanden follow-up een ‘trend to higher incidence of MACE and TLR’ in de Genous-stent groep is waargenomen ‘but it did not reach statistical significance’. In het CCI-artikel wordt bij de conclusies ook gesproken van een ‘trend to higher rate of MACE en TLR’. Volgens Orbus c.s. is het echter statistisch ook onjuist om bij een beperkt onderzoek als de Genius-Stemi studie bij de onderhavige waarnemingen van een trend te spreken. Of en in welke mate het onjuist is om in dit verband van een trend te spreken kan de voorzieningenrechter in het kader van dit kort geding niet vaststellen. Ook als dat statistisch onjuist zou zijn lijkt de betekenis daarvan beperkt omdat het blijkens de verklaring van Prof. [betrokkene 5] vooral te maken lijkt te hebben met de kleine omvang van de Genius-Stemi studie. Dat komt hierna aan de orde.

5.11.	Een tweede belangrijk punt van kritiek van Orbus c.s. is dat de Genius-Stemi studie te klein is om klinische conclusies uit te kunnen trekken. Dat is op zichzelf niet tussen de partijen in geschil. [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] hebben dat in hun CCI artikel ook vermeld: “The present trial was underpowered for individual clinical end-points”. Dat hun studie een ‘small single centre trial’ is ‘underpowered for MACE’ hebben [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] eerder vermeld in de EuroPCR presentatie van 21 mei 2009 en de ESC presentatie van augustus/september 2009. Zij hebben zich in de presentaties en in het CCI artikel ook steeds op het standpunt gesteld dat voor het trekken van klinische conclusies een groter onderzoek nodig is. In aanmerking genomen dat de presentaties en het artikel bedoeld zijn voor een publiek van cardiologen moet het voor toehoorders en lezers duidelijk worden geacht wat de beperkingen van het onderzoek zijn en in welke mate daaruit klinische conclusies kunnen worden getrokken. Tegen de achtergrond hiervan kan niet worden gezegd dat het spreken van een trend zelfs al zou dat volgens strikte statistische normen onjuist zijn in aanmerkelijke mate misleidend is.


5.12.	Een derde belangrijk punt van kritiek betreft de drie gevallen van trombose in de Genous-stent groep. Orbus c.s. hebben aan de hand van de door [gedaagde sub 1] ter beschikking gestelde angiografische gegevens van deze patiënten onderzoek laten doen door het Harrington-McLauhlin Heart & Vascular Institute en door dr. [betrokkene 3]. Deze onderzoeken wijzen – kort samengevat – uit dat er in deze drie gevallen onvolkomenheden bij de plaatsing van de stent zijn. Deze bevindingen zijn op zichzelf niet in geschil.
Naar aanleiding van deze onderzoeken hebben [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. in de presentatie van de Genius-Stemi studie aandacht besteed aan de mogelijkheid van andere oorzaken van de trombose gevallen. In de ESC presentatie van 31 augustus 2009 is onder andere vermeld:
“Independent angiographic assessment was provided by OrbusNeich – stent thrombosis MAY BE associated with geographic miss and possible stent underexpansion BUT
No Thrombosis in CO-Cr group with same technique”. In het CCI artikel schrijven zij:
“The cause of ST in this study is unknown. Of course stent thrombosis is multifactoral and mechanical reasons may play a major role in the pathology of these catastrophic events. Off-line angiographic core laboratory analysis (       ) of thrombotic cases in our study suggested that mechanical issues (…) might be the cause of these events. However stent implantation was carried out according to the standard clinical practice in both groups.” Ter zitting heeft prof. [betrokkene 5] desgevraagd verklaard dat de drie gevallen van trombose niet uitsluitend verklaard worden door de vastgestelde onvolkomenheden in de plaatsing van de stents. Volgens zijn verklaring kunnen die onvolkomenheden een rol gespeeld hebben. Onder deze omstandigheden kan niet worden gezegd dat [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. een onjuiste voorstelling van zaken hebben gegeven in dit opzicht.


5.13.	Een vierde belangrijk kritiekpunt van Orbus c.s. betreft de zogenoemde recruteringsperiode van patiënten voor het onderzoek. [gedaagde sub 1] heeft aanvankelijk te kennen gegeven dat die een periode van 5 maanden beliep van augustus 2007 tot december 2007. Later heeft hij gesteld dat het om een periode van 12 maanden ging van januari 2007 tot en met december 2007 om tenslotte uit te komen op een periode van 23 maanden van juli 2006 tot en en met mei 2008. Daarmee door Orbus c.s. geconfronteerd heeft [gedaagde sub 1] in zijn brief die op 21 augustus 2009 door Orbus c.s. is ontvangen toegegeven daarin een ‘terrible mistake’ te hebben begaan. Volgens hem is de juiste periode die van 23 maanden van juli 2006 tot en met mei 2008 geweest. Volgens Orbus c.s. roept dit twijfel op aan de deugdelijkheid van het onderzoek en met name over de vraag of de periode waarin het onderzoek zou plaatsvinden wel duidelijk tevoren in het onderzoeksprotocol gedefinieerd is. Volgens Orbus c.s. is een voorafgaande nauwkeurige definitie van de onderzoeksperiode van belang om te voorkomen dat onderzoekers gedurende de loop van het onderzoek de periode verlengen of verkorten en zo tot de gewenste uitkomsten kunnen komen. Ter zitting heeft [gedaagde sub 1] desgevraagd verklaard dat het onderzoek onder zijn supervisie heeft plaatsgevonden door [gedaagde sub 2] en dat hij aanvankelijk onvoldoende nauwkeurig heeft gekeken over welke periode het onderzoek had plaatsgevonden. Aan de hand van het onderzoeksprotocol heeft [gedaagde sub 1] ter zitting verder verklaard wat door Orbus c.s. verder onweersproken is gebleven dat in het onderzoeksprotocol een recruteringsperiode wordt genoemd van tussen de één en twee jaar en dat tijdens het derde jaar de klinische onderzoeken worden verricht. Bij deze stand van zaken kan niet worden gezegd dat aannemelijk is dat het onderzoek wat betreft de recruteringsperiode ondeugdelijk is geweest laat staan dat het onderzoek in dat opzicht is gemanipuleerd.

5.14.	Voorts is de kritiek van Orbus c.s. erop gericht dat cijfers die aanvankelijk in de presentaties zijn gebruikt later in het CCI artikel zijn gewijzigd. Op zichzelf is dat juist. Voor een deel gaat het echter om geringe aanpassingen zoals oneven percentages in naastgelegen even percentages. Orbus c.s. hebben niet voldoende uit de doeken gedaan dat waarom en in welk opzicht deze wijzigingen de deugdelijkheid van het onderzoek wezenlijk aantasten. Verder hebben Orbus c.s. zorgen over de randomisatie en de wijze waarop de 100 patiënten die in het onderzoek zijn betrokken zijn gerecruteerd uit de veel grotere groep van 822 Stemi-patienten. [gedaagde sub 1]  c.s. hebben aangegeven dat dit via de gesloten enveloppe methode is geschied en dat de recrutering van het uiteindelijk aantal personen verband houdt met de beschikbaarheid van de Genous stents. Daartegenover hebben Orbus c.s. niets concreets gesteld waaruit afgeleid moet worden dat de randomisatie en recrutering ondeugdelijk hebben plaatsgevonden.


5.15.	Dan blijft er nog een punt over. [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. hebben in verschillende bewoordingen bij herhaling bij het publiek maken van hun onderzoek gezegd dat de drie gevallen van trombose in de Genous-stent groep zorgelijk zijn en dat zolang geen omvangrijker onderzoek heeft plaatsgevonden het niet raadzaam is de Genous-stent te gebruiken bij Stemi-patiënten. Waar vast staat dat de gevonden hogere aantallen MACE (waaronder de drie trombose gevallen) en TLR in de Genous-stent groep geen statistische significantie hebben en het onderzoek te klein is geweest om klinische conclusies aan te verbinden wordt de waarschuwing dat het niet raadzaam is de Genous-stent bij Stemi-patiënten te gebruiken in wetenschappelijke zin onvoldoende door de resultaten van het onderzoek gedragen. Dat doet de vraag rijzen of deze waarschuwing niettemin in de gegeven omstandigheden door het recht van vrijheid van meningsuiting wordt beschermd. Aangenomen moet worden dat personen ook in wetenschappelijke publicaties tot op zekere hoogte vrijelijk een mening of waarschuwing moeten kunnen afgeven naar aanleiding van hun onderzoek ook al wordt die strikt genomen door de resultaten van hun onderzoek in wetenschappelijke zin niet gedekt. Voor die opvatting valt ook steun te vinden in EHRM 25 augustus 1998 NJ 1999712 (Hertel/Zwitserland). In het onderhavige geval moet het volgende in aanmerking worden genomen. De Genous-stent is juist bedoeld om het risico van stent-trombose te verminderen terwijl uit het onderzoek blijkt dat in de Genous-stent groep 3 gevallen van trombose in de 6-maands follow-up worden gevonden tegen 0 in de Chromium Cobalt-stent groep. Dat is opmerkelijk terwijl die drie gevallen zich niet uitsluitend door geconstateerde gebreken in de plaatsing van de stent laten verklaren.
Vast staat dat om klinische conclusies te kunnen trekken een veel uitgebreider onderzoek nodig is waarvan de resultaten jaren op zich kunnen laten wachten terwijl trombose voor Stemi-patienten bij wie een stent is geplaatst een ernstig gezondheidsrisico vormt. Of dat vervolgonderzoek er zal komen is overigens nog maar de vraag omdat zoals Prof.
[betrokkene 5] ter zitting verklaarde daarmee tientallen miljoenen euro’s gemoeid zullen zijn. Dat maakt enerzijds de gevolgen van zo’n waarschuwing voor Orbus c.s. zwaarder omdat de vaststelling van wat daarvan zij kostbaar en tijdrovend is maar anderzijds de uiting van zorg op basis van een kleiner onderzoek ook urgenter. Bij dit alles komt dat blijkens de onder 2.6 tot en met 2.11 geciteerde internet publicaties ook door andere cardiologen de vraag is opgeworpen of de veiligheid van de onderhavige innovatieve Genous-stent wel voldoende is onderzocht. Onder deze omstandigheden kan tegen de achtergrond van de in het onderzoek gevonden resultaten niet worden gezegd dat [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. de betamelijkheid te buiten zijn gegaan met de desbetreffende waarschuwing die kennelijk moet worden gezien als een uiting van hun persoonlijke bezorgdheid. Daarbij dient bedacht te worden dat de publicaties zijn gericht tot een publiek van cardiologen die geacht mogen worden hun eigen afweging te kunnen maken op grond van de onderliggende resultaten van het onderzoek.



5.16.	De wijze waarop de uit het onderzoek verkregen gegevens zijn geïnterpreteerd en gepresenteerd is niet vlekkeloos verlopen. Alles tegen elkaar afwegende kan echter niet worden gezegd dat het commerciële belang van Orbus c.s. en het meer algemene belang dat innovatie niet wordt ontmoedigd beperkingen zoals door hen gevorderd aan het recht van [gedaagde sub 1] en [gedaagde sub 2] om de resultaten van hun onderzoek te publiceren op de wijze zoals zij dat rekening houdend met kritiek van Orbus c.s. hebben gedaan rechtvaardigen. Niet gezegd kan daarom worden dat [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. onrechtmatig jegens Orbus c.s. hebben gehandeld. Voor toewijzing van enig deel van het gevorderde is reeds daarom geen grond. De vorderingen zullen dan ook worden afgewezen met veroordeling van Orbus c.s. in de kosten.
5.17.	Orbus c.s. zullen als de in het ongelijk gestelde partij in de proceskosten worden veroordeeld. De kosten aan de zijde van [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. worden begroot op:
- griffierecht		€ 	56800
- salaris advocaat		81600
Totaal		            €          1.38400




6.	De beoordeling in reconventie:
6.1.	Het persbericht van Orbus c.s. geeft tot aan de zin die begint met ‘however changes’ een wellicht wat gekleurd maar als zodanig niet onjuist beeld van de voorgeschiedenis in aanmerking genomen dat de interpretatie en presentatie van de uit het onderzoek verkregen gegevens niet vlekkeloos is geweest zoals hiervoor in conventie besproken. In de zin die begint met ‘however’ geven Orbus c.s. hun visie die overeenstemt met het standpunt dat zij in deze procedure hebben ingenomen. Niet gezegd kan worden dat dat het betamelijke te buiten gaat. De vorderingen in reconventie moeten daarom worden afgewezen.


6.2.	[gedaagde sub 1] c.s. zal als de in het ongelijk gestelde partij in de proceskosten worden veroordeeld. De kosten aan de zijde van Orbus c.s. worden begroot op € 40800 (factor 05 × tarief € 81600) voor salaris advocaat 

 

7.	De beslissing
De voorzieningenrechter



in conventie
7.1.	wijst de vorderingen af



7.2.	veroordeelt Orbus c.s. in de proceskosten aan de zijde van [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. tot op heden begroot op 
€ 1.38400



in reconventie
7.3.	wijst de vorderingen af


7.4.	veroordeelt [gedaagde sub 1] c.s. in de proceskosten aan de zijde van Orbus c.s. tot op heden begroot op € 40800.


Dit vonnis is gewezen door mr. R.J.B. Boonekamp en in het openbaar uitgesproken in tegenwoordigheid van de griffier mr. M.J. Daggenvoorde op 13 mei 2011.
